API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93625
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/god2025-56491-the-trust-trap-security-vo
Title: The Trust Trap - Security von Coding Assistants

Welcome back everybody. I hope you all had a nice break and are recharged with some coffee
and some sweets. Now we have here Clemens Hübner. You may have already seen him before
on the other track. Luckily, he jumped in for one of the speakers who could not attend
today anymore. And we're thinking about, for his introduction, maybe we can just like, you know,
replay what has been told on the other side. But no, I'm gonna introduce you properly. So, a warm
welcome to Clemens. He works at InovEx in the area of security. He is passionate about secure
development, everything it has to do with, you know, secure development lifecycle and so on. And
nowadays also taking care about how to develop code securely with the use of AI and with the
help of AI. We've been hearing quite a lot, specifically also in this room about AI, LLMs or
MCP servers today, how AI can be security in production and so on. But what about during the
development lifecycle? And this is where he will be talking about the trust rep, security of coding
assistants. I kindly ask you to all give Clemens a warm welcome.
Thanks. Thank you very much for the kind introduction. Great to be back on the other stage. So,
and welcome you all to my second talk today. The talk I actually submitted. So, we are talking now
about the security of coding assistants. And I think it was a bit introduced in the keynote
this morning. And some people were complaining that the positivity was lacking. So, I brought you
this slide of the huge success story of code AI. So, there are statistics that almost every developer
in the US is using some kind of AI coding tools nowadays. Almost half of the code that is written
nowadays is written with the use of AI, so they claim. And it's a huge market as everything
related to Chennai is. So, that looks quite like a success story, I would say, right?
So, that's enough for the optimism in my talk today. Let's have a look at the other side of this
huge success of code AI. So, we have a lot in the news about vibe coding going wrong,
about prompt injection in coding assistants, about data exploration in vibe coding tools.
So, we want to have a look at what is behind all of these vulnerabilities. What do we have to
consider when we want to use AI for coding and how it is possible to make it secure or if it is
possible. So, I was already introduced. My name is Clemens. I think that's all you need to know.
Let's dive into the topic. So, let's have a look at this rise of code AI again. So,
vibe coding, this term was named in the morning already. It's really a new term. I don't know if
you know, but it was, I think, coined by Andrew Caparti in February this year. So, it's almost
very old. And he used it in this tweet about this new style of programming where you just formulate
natural language requirements and do not touch any code yourself and you just go with the vibe
and see what happens and discard things and see if something works and if not, then you try again.
So, this is the origin, at least as far as I know, of the term vibe coding.
But of course, there is older types of code AI. So, back in the days, we had some things
that were simply auto-completion and I think that is where all the started, where a lot of these
tools originate from, where some of them, tab 9, for example, now is evolving more into really
code agents. But back then, it was merely, I take the current line as an import or maybe the current
method, a signature, whatever, and I predict the next, the next lines, the next part of code. So,
that was basically auto-completion and then the LLM hype started and people started using
a chat GPT as a Q&A helper, putting code in there, asking questions, how do I implement that,
get code back, copy it, put it in their project and started to have this conversational approach
to coding AI. And then, this evolved and we had this RAC based assistance that were able to
get more context, so being able to integrate in your project and in the files,
getting the right files for the right context and returning codes in the bits that were
more fitting to the actual existing code base. And then, the coding agents came up where the
big difference is that they are able to use some tools that they are not based on the LLM
and some RAC for retrieval additional information, but were able to execute some code and also do
some bigger code changes themselves. And then, the next step would then be the five coding agents
that operate mainly on natural language where you are theoretically able to get an entire
application out of them without writing a single line of code or even reading a single line of code
yourself, but just explaining what you want to do, get an app, try it out, formulate some
changes or start over, so this is the idea of this vibing era of coding assistance.
So, a lot of things going on there and I think everyone developing software themselves or
working with teams that develop software experience a lot of this evolution themselves and I guess
most of you also thought about how's the security of this coding and assistance and that's what
we want to delve in today. So, if we have a look at the attack surface of such a coding
assistant and I will use the terms coding assistant, code agent, code AI a bit. As synonyms in the
following, you saw that the different types and you may be able to see that some things are more
relevant for the more evolved types of coding agents, but I will use them right as synonyms.
So, let's have a look at the attack surface of a typical coding assistant. We have
usually some kind of user prompt, so the user formulate some stuff, some requirements, maybe an
entire story they want to do, maybe just fixing some bugs. The coding assistant retrieves some
context, additional files, everything that is laying in the repository next to it and it combines
that to a prompt using their own logic, their own system prompt. Basically, what the creators
of the coding assistant think is the right way to formulate this problem to the LLM and the LLM
is just getting this entire prompt. As one big prompt you all know, LMs basically just predict
the next word. So, everything comes in, we have a big prompt and the LLM starts from there and
predicts the next word, hopefully the answer. But this is a very, very important thing. So,
everything comes together in this prompt going into the LLM and some of you might already
spot the issue with different things from different parts being combined there.
And then, of course, the LLM is not working out of the blue, but it was trained on some data
back in the day. So, I wanted to show this below the dotted line here. So, also, this
training data might be interesting when thinking about the attack surface for a coding assistant.
And then, of course, the coding assistant has the possibility to use some tools to do some
web searches, to read documentation, to maybe access a database, to access our Git log, to see
what was there in the past. So, these things might be an output out of the LLM that decides,
I want to use this tool and the coding assistant uses this tool and it goes back to the LLM
until we have some kind of output. And these outputs can be some code changes. I think that's
the obvious thing that comes out of an coding assistant, actual lines of code. But the coding
assistant might also be able to debug something and to execute some commands or to test our
software. So, this might also be part of the tool usage during the evaluation, but it might also be
some kind of result of a run of the coding assistant. So, that's a bit simplified, but general way to
have a look at the different moving parts in a coding assistant. So, now we want to think about
at these different areas what might be the security implications we have to talk about.
And I usually like to not invent everything by myself, but having a look at existing resources.
So, I thought maybe as web coding or coding assistants are such a big thing,
maybe there's something by the overs on that. I guess it's not a very specific problem.
A lot of people using code AIs of what about, do we have a over top 10 for code AI or do we have
some checklists or some things. And it's quite hard to find resources from over specific on
on coding AI. There's a lot on JNI in general or even more broader on the machine learning on AI,
but it's hard to find something really for code AI. So, we will talk about this later. Maybe we
can change this. But for today, we need to use what is there. And I decided on have a look at the
over top 10 for LLM applications, very famous project. The little sister of the big over top 10,
specifically for LLM applications here. And in the end, the coding assistant is just an LLM
application. So, maybe this helps us to structure the attack surface of our coding assistant. So,
let's have a look at this top 10. We will not go into detail there. You might already know
the list. It's a very good starting point if you're interested in LLM security. So, I will not
explain everything in detail, but we will really focus on what this means for our coding assistant.
So, the first point and the very famous starting point for LLM vulnerabilities is, of course,
prompt injection. So, how might prompt injection influence our coding assistant? So, an attacker
might use prompt injection. So, inserting malicious text into the prompt that is then
evaluated by the LLM to do some things, the LLM or the entire agent was not designed to do. So,
that's basically prompt injection. And you can think about direct prompt injections where the attacker
really puts things in the prompt itself. But in our case, the user, the person that is
really using the coding assistant is basically the developer. So, that might hack himself. But
there are other ways where an attacker can put stuff into our prompt. We saw this before. It's not
just the user prompt. It's also the context of the project that goes into the prompt injection.
And that's what is interesting for this indirect prompt injection and attacker might try to
manipulate other files that in the end, in one way or another, land in the context to do such a
prompt injection. And one very famous thing, are these rules files. I really have to
make sure I get the plural here, but it's rules file. So, that's right. So, in this rules file,
you can state some general information for your coding assistant, like a specific pre-prommed where
you can say, I always use this mock library for mocking in my tests or I want this coding style,
I want tabs, not spaces, something like that. That's things you can give the coding assistant as
rules in this rules file. And these files are broadly shared in the internet because it's
really interesting to get working pre-prommed for this coding assistant. It's very helpful if
you get some good rules files. So, there's a lot of things in the internet. And, of course,
people are trying to mess with these files. And there were some occurrences of poisoned rules
files where with some UTF magic, or some Unicode magic, they hidden some additional prompts here
that is not visible in a normal editor, but is then evaluated by the LLM later and then
changes the code and we might plant a backdoor then. And so, this is one way an attacker might
plant some information in our prompt, but there are also more stealthy ways. This is a very interesting
paper with a nice name, xoxo, I don't know how cross origin context, I don't know. They use
this abbreviation because it's nice. What's it about? The attacker is here manipulating
some files in a different project, but it might be in a dependency you are using in
your project and that is written by the LLM as part of the context, or it might be in a
repository next to yours. And they did some semantics preserving changes there, so the code
itself was not changing, but through some reverse engineering of the weights of the LLM in the end,
they were able to shift the decisions of the AI assistant in the end to develop authentication
that is not secure anymore. So, that's a famous attack there. And with the time, the context
windows of the LLMs are getting bigger and bigger. So, more and more information is loaded into the
context of all the different dependencies, the documentation for that. You can imagine how
easy it is to plant some information there and it will all land in the prompt. So, prompt injection
is a big thing there. And then we heard in the talk before, also about MPMCP server.
So, that is a way to unify this API between our LLM's and some external tools. But in the end,
it's also a very convenient way to build up an ecosystem where it's very easy to integrate a new
foreign MCP server into your coding tool. And even if the tool is not called, just because the MCP
server advertises its capabilities, these capabilities land in the prompt because the LLM should be able
to decide if they want to use this tool. And even if it's not used, it's possible that you poison
your prompt with that. So, in the end, each MCP server has to be trusted. We had a discussion
before, how could you verify that this MCP server is trusted? I think it's hard to do. You can,
of course, have a look at the current communication with the MCP server, but you will not notice that
easily if something changed. So, it's basically like you are downloading an exophile and you are
looking if it's doing something bad. And then you download it again for the next year, every day,
and you just hope that nothing changes. So, it's very hard to control and to verify. So, that's not
really a problem of MCP, but MCP is really making it easy to integrate. So, of us, you will not
control and you do not know into your coding assistant. So, I think that's an epic issue there.
Okay. Let's have a look at another problem, the sensitive information disclosure. So, we now know
how we could influence the prompt. So, now we can think about what can we do if we are able to
influence or poison the prompt to a prompt injection. So, you all might know the coding AI has access
to all the code, of course, that might be an interesting intellectual property, of course,
but it also might be able to have access to the repository, to the GitHub server, to read
some secrets there, to read some logs, maybe have access to the file system beyond the current
directory, reading credentials, SSH keys. So, the code AI has access to some sensitive information,
and there was a nice example on how to explore this Kamo League, where they were not using an
IDE based coding assistant, but this GitHub co-pilot chat that you are using in the web UI, where you
can, for example, ask questions about pull requests, and if the pull request comes from an attacker,
there might be able to place some invisible commands or comments, and then they are getting
commands in their pull request, and the agent then, of course, runs with the rights of the users,
and they were able to access other repos, the user is able to access or secrets,
and then they needed it to extract, but we will come to that later. First of all,
it's important to understand that the coding assistants and everything that is
connected with the sensitive data has a possible access to this data, of course.
All right, let's have a look at the supply chain issues here, place three and over top 10
for LLMs, so I think it's clear that the code AI itself gets part of your supply chain, right, so
they are an important development tool, so of course, they should be considered part of your
software supply chain, and so are the LLMs inside, and we have the problem that is very obvious,
LLMs are black box, it's not possible to audit them to control what they trained on,
and if you are using some external LLMs, they change all the time, you might not even notice
that some things change there, so it's not really reproducible, but of course, the code AI has
also an influence on the supply chain of the project itself, because they might introduce
some new dependencies, and that's where this nice thing named slob squirting comes from,
some of you might know, type of squirting where developers accidentally mess up some names
of dependencies, of packages, and slob squirting is exploiting that a coding assistant hallucinates
as every LLM does, and may come up with some dependencies that are not actually existing,
except an attacker registered them beforehand and planted some malware in there, so there was the
first occurrence of that, at least I noticed was two years ago where someone noticed that
searchability was always hallucinating some hugging phase CLI library, I think it was,
and they tried to register that and then see if people download it and execute a pre-install
script or something like that, so that's a very big problem with hallucinating parts of your supply
chain there. All right, so let's have a look at the data and model poisoning, I think
it's pretty obvious, we talked about the LLMs being a black box, we do not know what the training
data is in there, so model poisoning is basically if you manipulate weights in an actual model,
that's only relevant if you're really downloading the model yourself from hugging phase for example,
and there are a lot of different models there, and I think it's quite hard to see what are the
rights want for you and it's easy for people to manipulate weights there, so the LLM might
give you some bad answers later, but the more obvious attack vector is of course through the
training data, so yeah everything that is used for training might contain some insecure implementations
or some backdoors, so that's a big problem there, and then there's also the problem with agents,
if they have access to the web and are looking for solutions for specific problems there,
there's something coming up like CO poisoning for agents where websites try to lure
agents onto their sites, giving them wrong advice there, and yeah it's a whole topic how to convince
an agent that you're the best site for it and not a search engine, but that's also a poisoning issue
there. Okay let's have a look at this improper output handling, I was mentioning this before when
we talked about this sensitive information, the code AI is able to access, so now the question
is how do we get this out of there, if we are able to access a credential or some secure code,
how can we extract this, and this is where yeah the output handling of the coding agents come in
place, I mean if you have an agent that is able to do arbitrary requests with a web then it's
quite quite easy, but if you are restricting your coding agent more thoroughly then you might need
to leverage some other tools disguised in loading some images that you have put in a markdown file
for example, and you can of course also use this this vulnerability to yeah do some SQL injections
in databases, if you are able to manipulate SQL queries to execute arbitrary code, so we will come
to that later, but first let's have a second look at this Kamolik vulnerability, where they actually
yeah used a markdown images like small pixels that were then placed in the response of the coding
assistant matching the secrets they just discovered, and there was a nice bypass of the CSP that
GitHub employed that should normally prevent such exfiltration because GitHub has its own
image server that's widely listed in the CSP and they registered their images and they needed
in there and then used that to exfiltration the data by having a look at what images were loaded
through this agents, so that's a more disguised way to exfiltration data, but that's the third
part that is really important when we want to see what the big problem with coding assistants
are, and there's this nice name, a lethal trifecta, Simon Wilson came up with that,
it's quite interesting a name, and his analysis is that if you have, oh sorry, I wanted to show
you this first, if an agent has access to private data and is able to communicate externally and is
also able or exposed to untrusted content then in this combination you really have a problem because
it can be manipulated to access data and exfiltration out there, and that's exactly what we have,
if we have a prompt injection then we are able to use this untrusted content to
do actions that are not intended, we have this sensitive data disclosure of course we have with
coding assistants and we have this ability to communicate externally, and I think that's the
important thing when thinking about how to prevent this lethal trifecta, we will not be able to
solve prompt injection, I will come to that later, we want the coding assistant to have access to
the data that's what makes it valuable, so we really need to focus on this communication,
so but we will cover this later in the countermeasures if I'm having time, so let's go a bit
faster, the agency thing we already had a glance at it, so just to recap an agent is just an LLM
with a goal and the possibility to plan things and to execute the call of the LLM's multiple
times, but the important thing is it has access to tools, and for a coding agent this means it has
access to a shell maybe to execute some commands, to run tests, to see if everything is working anymore,
to access logs, to maybe access gyro, the database, everything there, and if you combine this usage
or access to tools with the possibility of prompt injection then an attacker might do some confused
deputy attacks where he uses the big capabilities of the agent on abusing the tools that are accessible,
and I think the famous example for that was Weblet, in summer most of you might know this,
where this web coding agent was called out in social media, and because it deleted an entire
production database because it panicked, it later said, so it had access to this prod database,
it needed everything there, and then to cover it up, it produced some fake data, it lied about,
it's really fun to read it, if you're not involved then I'm sorry, but for external
people it's really interesting to read, and that shows if it was unintentionally right, so no
attacker involved here, it was just the problem of the LLM you can imagine, what this means if an
attacker really tries to do this on purpose, so that's a problem there. All right, system prompt
leakage, there was some discussion in the talk before, I think we can sum this up very quickly,
system prompt can be leaked, there's nothing to do about it, and you should always consider
your system prompt as public, and I think that's one more commonly known, so I do not really see
security issue for coding assistance here, similar with this vector and embedding weaknesses, so
coding assistance use some vector databases to get additional context, attackers might use this to
manipulate what goes into the context and whatnot, but with the bigger context windows this might not
even be necessary anymore, but there are also examples on how this works, but now let's come to
the point number nine, and I think it's sad that it's so so late in this list, because I think
that's the most interesting part, what most of you thought about when talking about security
of coding assistance, because we think about what is the code actually doing, how secure is the code
that the coding assistant is doing, and that's what is basically the misinformation coding
assistance are delivering, so let's have a look into that in detail, so how secure or how, what is
the quality of code coming out of this coding assistance, so there's a lot of code coming out
there, so there's a lot of, yeah, studies about that, there is a general, yeah, decrease in code
quality visible, more code is generated, the code turns or how often this code changed and deleted
again is really increasing, you can see this in this study from code clear, get clear here,
more and more code is added, code is changed more often, but, and the refactoring of the code is
getting less and less, that might be a quality problem, but maybe it's just a different way that
wipe coding is, is working, so it's different than today's and maybe it's, it's a bad sign, but I would
not, I think we, you cannot say for sure, so let's have a look really at the, at the security issues
here, so there's a big study from where code from the summer where they asked over 100 different
models to, to write simple code exercises, code tasks and almost half of it failed by introducing
really some basic over top 10 weaknesses there, also some weaknesses, I really thought that
might be, might be gone nowadays are coming up, up there and, but what, what really the interesting
thing here is because they had a look at that many models there, they can, could compare
the, the newer models from this year to older models, there's old or something like that,
and while other properties of the models are getting better, security is not a, not improving
there, so the newer models are not really better than the older, and there's a lot of research going
on in this, this field, one project I really like is a BackSpange, I think it's from it too hard
Zurich, and they came up with an open source project where they evaluated different models
and you can have a look at the tasks, the, the model is given in there, and, but it had a similar
result there when they published it, this, this May, 62% of all solutions were either incorrect,
so maybe that's better or they were correct and had a security vulnerability in there,
but even for, of the secure, correct solutions, around half of them were, were insecure, so
you can have a look at the, the leaderboard on their website, it's quite interesting, they,
try, run it again for the new models as well, but you really see that correctness and security is,
it's not a really high value there, but of course it's, it's hard to compare it, so
like what is the value of an, of an average developer, is it more than 50%, is it less,
have a look at the, at the tasks, try it out yourself and then, then decide, so I think it's,
it's not a good, good value there, but it's, it's hard to say how to compare it, and of course it's
depending on what model you use and what you are trying to, to implement, so for example there was,
there's a study that deep-seak, if you're implementing some, some code that is related to
t-bird for example, suddenly had quite more security bugs in it than if you're developing
something politically neutral, so that's quite, quite interesting and there, it's hard to tell if
it's on purpose or if it's just baked in, you, you can just not tell with LLMs, right? So yeah,
these are some of the, the problems with, with the code coming out of coding assistance.
I tried to group the most common flaws with, with code AI into top four of code AI or something
like that, and so these are really the, the most common things you see when you find security bugs
in AI-generated code, you often see this happy curve path bias, so it just tries to fulfill the
functionality you, you tell them, and they are missing basic security controls if you're not
explicitly state that, that you want them, they are just trying to, to build the feature,
and we have this problem of learned insecurity based on the, the insecure code it was learned on,
also a lot of legacy patterns, old cipher that are reused, old libraries that are reused,
things you see on stack overflow that maybe are not not perfect, all this is, is learned in
security, and you have of course the problem that the, the LLM or the coding assistant might not get
the, the whole architecture of your app if you do not tell them, so they might not understand
the trust model or the, the roles and permissions, and they make logical flaws, that's, that's a
problem there, and of course you have the problem with hallucination, you might catch this because
the app is not running, but yeah, there were also occurrences of using API's wrong, using
secure flags in API's wrong, so in the end it was not, not secure anymore, and of course this,
the slop squatting problem I introduced before, so, but the problem with that is, and that's where I
come to, to the title of my talk is, maybe that's all fine if we use it correctly, but are we aware
of this problems, and there's this nice study from Stanford, it's, it's almost two years old now, but
they checked if people write more insecure code with AI assistants, and they did, but the more
interesting thing in there, and I think that is still the valid nowadays, and even though they
wrote more insecure code, they were more convinced that the code they, they wrote with AI is, is
better than if they wrote it themselves, so this is the, this trust trap I see with using AI
that people are not aware of the insecurities that comes with this, with this code, so this is
about the misinformation, I really need to hurry up, I think unbound consumption that's not really
relevant for, for coding assistance, let's, let's keep that, and let's have a look at a short look
at the, at the counter matters, how can we deal with this, this problems, and I, I tried to think
about how good can we solve the different problems, we, we just discovered, I think there are some
problems, like from injection, like data poisoning that are just inherent to, to the usage of LLMs,
and it is currently not possible to really, yeah, prevent them, you can only mitigate these problems,
others you might be able to prevent, if you carefully design your permissions and de-access
rights, they have, and other things you can, you can prevent by, by conventional countermeasure,
so for supply chain we, it's a big problem, but we have some ideas and I think they are not so
different than if you develop software yourself, so I will not be able to go in any detail here,
but I will share the slides later, so have a look at them here, I also have some
information on what, what I think are, covers the, the entire process when you want to use your
coding assistant yourself, from the right prompt engineering, from reviews and tests, but also
from, from designing before that, but I think I'm, I'm a bit over time, so I hope you got to know
the different areas, code AI has to be secured, had a look at the different, different areas,
and now I'm happy to take some questions, thanks a lot.
Thank you very much Clemens, are there any questions from the room?
Yes. So thank you for your talk, well it's a bit of provocative question,
how should there be any, any positive movement in IT security or encoding security, if you have,
like when, when this whole AI thing started, we had a bunch of code which was not secure and the
little code which was secure, so as you told the stack overflow effect, and now it's like the AI,
AI learned from this, created code which is mostly insecure, put it back into the wild and the AI
keeps learning from this, so how do you think is it possible to, to get, to get out of this loop?
Yeah, yeah that's a good question, I mean is it really so different than how new developers
learned, they are also not just looking at the perfect code and learn from that, but they are
also looking at bad examples at bad stack overflow questions, so maybe that's not so big of a
difference, I think it's important to understand what the limitations are and then to build processes
around it to use it in the right way, I don't think that code AI will be the end of software
security, but it will also not be the beginning of software security, it's just a different tool,
different kind of writing code and you have to continue with the processes before and after
they are just there today. Thank you very much, I would say the question could be taken offline,
thank you very much Catherine, and for the second and last time for today, a warm thank you to
Clemens. Thank you.
