API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93518
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/god2025-56473-the-surprising-complexity
Title: The Surprising Complexity of Finding Known Vulnerabilities

All right, hello everyone, I'm glad to be here and joined with Dustin and to have the
next 20 minutes with you for this very exciting but very complex topic and I think we could
even fill whole classes with this topic so we really need to focus on some specific parts
just to set some expectations.
This is not about AI, maybe one of the few talks but I think you can still see some connections
to the keynote that we just heard.
So without further ado, let's get started.
So just as an introduction, as already introduced, we're working at USD.
We are on the offensive side of things, mainly doing penetration testing, red teaming, helping
our clients with vulnerability management. USD is actually doing more than that. We're
also doing security consulting and security audits, but Dustin and myself are in the technical
IT security realm. And our mission at USD is that we protect companies against hackers
and criminals, and this is not an easy task. And in this task, we're constantly faced with
the topic of finding vulnerabilities. And so in the first stage, we would like to set
some basics for the later part of the talk. So we need to talk about some concepts. What's
really hard if you're talking about security assessments or finding vulnerabilities, you're
always faced with what does quality actually mean? What are we actually optimizing for?
And I really like this very basic and abstract model. If you think about finding a vulnerability,
there are basically four possibilities. First one is a true positive, meaning that there
is a vulnerability and you found it. That's great. That's what it's supposed to do. There
is a true negative, so there is no vulnerability and there was no indication of a vulnerability.
That's also great because the result is correct. And then we have false positives, which are
very annoying because they produce a lot of work for companies and individuals, because
you need to do all the research, you need to see whether the problem is just to find out
that there is actually no problem and there is nothing wrong. So you spend a lot of time
for nothing. But what's even worse, in my opinion, is false negatives because those
are risks that remain undiscovered. And therefore, in security assessments, we need to assess
what we need to optimize in order to avoid false negatives and really make sure that
we find all the vulnerabilities. So penetration testing is not about finding some vulnerabilities,
it's not about optimizing for 80%, but you really want to ensure that you find all the
vulnerabilities while still keeping false positives low.
Second concept that we need to introduce, and this is also part of the title of the talk,
we basically have to differentiate two different things. So first one being known vulnerabilities
and unknown vulnerabilities. And in our definition, or just the definition for the talk, when
we talk about known vulnerabilities, we mean vulnerabilities that have already been publicly
disclosed, that were identified before, that there is some kind of documentation about it.
And in a penetration test, from our offensive perspective, but also on the defender side,
if you just have a piece of software, you can identify known vulnerabilities by looking
up in databases, doing the research, while unknown vulnerabilities, for example, in a
specific application that you develop yourself, you need to apply active test methods, something
like penetration testing to actively hunt for those vulnerabilities. And for the purpose
of this talk, we only want to focus on known vulnerabilities since this is already challenging
enough. Okay, so let's go into some more details.
In an ideal world, if we look for vulnerabilities in a software, let's say we just picked some
random example, let's say we want to see whether there are actually some vulnerabilities. We
would use some kind of search engine, let's make it very abstract. And as a result, we
would expect a list of vulnerabilities from a single authoritative source. Ideally, each
vulnerability would have a unique identifier that we could use to look it up. It would
have detailed information about what the vulnerability is about, how we can fix it. Maybe even some
indicators of compromise, you know, for the threat hunters, for the incident responders,
for traffickers, amongst us, for the defenders. Maybe some practical remediation advice, is
there actually an patch that I can install? Is there a proof of concept out there? What's
the priority? Some kind of scoring, which I can use to really make sure that I'm fixing
the right vulnerabilities, because there are just so many right now that you can't really
probably can't fix all of them immediately, so you can and need to prioritize. And finally,
ideally, we want to integrate this into our own toolset at companies and to have it machine
readable using an API. Now, you can already tell from the title of this slide that we're
not living in an ideal world. And the reality looks a little bit more like this. And we
try to collect all the different scores and databases and abbreviations. So I challenge
each of you working in the field. Let's see if you can, you know, speak out all of the
abbreviations on the slide, if you can. Good job. But it's just, it's complex. So let's
look at some in more detail. And the actual question is if the vulnerability is already
known, so it means someone has already discovered it. Why is the information about this vulnerability
so hard to, you know, access or to get? So we need to talk about some, some foundations.
And the foundation of our vulnerability ecosystem, let's call it like this, is of course CVE.
So the common vulnerabilities and exposures, probably all of you have already heard that
in, you know, the format. It's a CVE and then the, the year and then the number. And those
are, those IDs are issued by, by so-called CNAs. It's a CVE numbering authorities in
order to have a unique identifier and then NIST enriches this information with further
details. For example, what it applies to some, some scoring, et cetera. And the big challenge
in, in this part is, and it, and you know, it, it works kind of well and it worked very
well for a long time. But this system is struggling at the moment. And I brought you some statistics
on the right. This is from the NVD, which is the national vulnerability database. And
they have a backlog. You can see it in the, in the lower part of the slide of more than
26,000 vulnerabilities or CVEs that are awaiting analysis. So those are CVEs that are registered.
But the national vulnerability database, the team there is struggling to actually enrich
this CVEs with the information that defenders really need in order to, you know, act upon
those vulnerabilities. And it's not because they're not trying. You can see this in the,
in the upper part of the slide, they're more, you know, working on more than 4,000 vulnerabilities
per month. So I'm not saying they're doing a bad job. I'm just saying they're struggling
to keep up with the increasing volume. And to be honest, this also has to do something
with the, with the structure and the organizational topics. Those are US government funded institutions
and probably all of you can tell what this means nowadays, which means they're struggling
to keep up the funding they have. They are experiencing, you know, funding cuts, which
leads to, you know, increased analysis times. And it's just not no longer a reliable or
a single reliable source that we can use when it comes to vulnerability information.
Second thing that is kind of the foundation of our vulnerability ecosystem is a common
platform enumeration. Just a show of hands. Who of you knows CPE or has heard the term?
Okay, quite some, maybe half of the room. All right. So CPE is a structured naming scheme
in order to identify software and its version. And this is very important because if you
find a vulnerability, you really want to make it very precise what this vulnerability applies
to or to which software and which version it applies to. And the structure looks something
like this. Again, we brought you the general structure in the top and just an example in
the bottom. And this is kind of a very good format. It's machine readable. You don't even
need AI to automate things, which is great. But the problem is that it's not very, you
know, user friendly in a sense that if you just know the software name, it's not so easy
to translate it. And there is even some confusion. So multiple CPEs are possible for the same
product and version. Another thing is the central CPE database. Yes, there is a central
CPE database which is maintained by the NVD. And you can probably see where this is going.
This has the same funding and structural issues that NVD has with the CPE database. So again,
this is like a very, it's a foundation pillar when it comes to vulnerability management,
but it's struggling at the moment with the amount of increasing vulnerabilities and the
structures that we've established. The last piece in the foundation puzzle is we need
a score. And probably, let's do it again because I like it. Show of hands, you know,
see VSS. That's almost all of you. Perfect. So the common vulnerability scoring system.
It produces a score from zero to 10. It's very easy. It only requires you, I think, to
put in eight, eight to 10 variables. And in the base score, I'm only talking about the
base score right now. And it's great when it comes to analyzing the technical impact.
Of course, there is a lot of criticism because you're kind of, you know, always when you
cut dense information, you're losing some kind of information. So sometimes it's hard
to tell. And the number might be a little bit too high or a little bit too low. But in
general, it's a nice scheme. But what it really lacks is some kind of the business impact.
And it tells you kind of a technical severity. But it's not really super helpful when it
comes to what the actual exploitability, what the risk and maybe also this is important
for the prioritization, what this is. So let's quickly look at some of the newer developments.
And those were the challenges. And this is kind of the reaction to that. We're seeing
increased data sources, meaning that new databases and projects get established. For
example, there is the GitHub security advisories project, which is kind of a replicating the
structure of the CVE database. But with their own data, they have a different approach, more
community driven, more open source, more transparent. There is the Cesar known exploited vulnerabilities
catalog, which is really trying to focus on the later part. So which vulnerabilities
get really exploited in the wild? So as a defender, you should probably focus on those
first. This also references the new scoring system, which is the exploit prediction scoring
system, EPSS, which is producing a value from zero to one, and kind of measuring the likelihood
that this vulnerability is exploited in the wild. And we also see improvements in other
areas. But this creates new challenges because now we have different scoring systems, as
you've seen on the slide with the word cloud, we have different databases and we kind of
need to match them together. And this brings us to our contribution to the solution. I
think we cannot solve the whole problem, but we wanted to at least make a small contribution
to the solution. And with this, I would like to hand it over to Dustin to get started with
search worlds. Yes, thank you, Matthias. So having discovered all these challenges and
problems, we then start developing our own tool eventually because we didn't find one
that actually solves these challenges to our needs. And the tool is called search phones,
and it's based on like these six core principles, which first would be accuracy. As Matthias
showed, we kind of only want to see the vulnerabilities that are relevant for us. So we would like
to really minimize the false negatives and false positives and only get the results that
we're looking for. The way that search phones kind of works in this way is they use the
CP strings, Matthias also described, and that enables it to be very accurate in comparison,
for example, to text-based searches. What also kind of comes together with this accuracy
part is consolidating multiple data sources to get like the most holistic view of the
vulnerability landscape. As Matthias mentioned, the NVD is kind of lacking in this department,
so you need to also include other databases. And then eventually, of course, kind of merge
it down to like one final result for the end user. Important for us also was the third
principle to have an all-in-one tool that we can use in different situations, for different
use cases. For example, in a pen test, you might want to look up manually a software
inversion that you found and then get results for that. Or also, if you use a scanner for
automated scanning, you also want to have your vulnerability checker in there. Of course,
if you have this all-in-one tool and you rely on it, you also rely on it to be up-to-date.
And search phones manages to do this. It pulls the public instance, like everything that's
public is updated daily, and of course, if you set it up yourself, which you can do,
then you can update it even more frequently. Also, there is one problem with this CP concept,
which materials kind of went into a little bit. There's this catalog provided by the
NVD with all the known CPEs. And the problem also here is that the NVD is lacking behind
a little bit, which is totally understandable. There's a lot of software products out there.
A lot of versions getting released may be daily, weekly. But ultimately, this leads
to some CPEs, especially for like newer software versions, to not be in this catalog. Then,
if you kind of just use this catalog to find your CPE for a user input, you might not find
a CPE, and then you might not be able to find vulnerabilities for it. Search phones kind
of take us this a little bit by creating its own CPEs in a way, by using this existing
data and then combining it with the user's query. And then you get as syntax-wise and
semantically correct CPE, they can still use the search for vulnerabilities. And there's
also the fifth principle for us as a pandemic and security consultant is including the actual
results in the report. So we kind of wanted to find a good solution there too. And lastly,
in some cases and situations, we don't always have internet access. So we really wanted
to have search phones work offline as well, just as it does online. What I kind of a little
bit forgot to mention is that this consolidating of multiple data sources is handled in a module
of fashion, which is kind of maybe shown here a little bit better with the architecture.
On the right-hand side, you can see kind of the module section that's divided into four
separate phases, which I won't talk in detail about now. But essentially, all of these individual
modules can attach to the input of the phases and then deliver output out of these phases.
And then the search phone's core, like in the center here, kind of merges that together
and provides it to the user on the left-hand side, either via a command line interface
tool, via a web application, or also like a programmatic Python API. And as for the modules
that we currently have and the databases that we use, that's of course like as the central
pillar kind of the NVD originally. But that's also especially recently become more the GitHub
security advisor, advisory database as well. And boom checks, NVD++, which is like this
checkmark. We also have other data included, like for example, for back patches by Linux
distributions, currently only Debian, but we're planning on including Ratat and Ubuntu
2. And lastly, for us as pen testers, it's also important that if we do find a vulnerability,
are there any experts for it? Can we exploit it in some way? So we also include the expert
DB, for example, or POC and GitHub. And yeah, how search ones actually looks like, how we
can use it? I want to show you now with a short demo. Here that's essentially like the main
landing page and home page, and you directly are confronted with this prompt that you can
just search some software for or in, for example, gray log and then it suggests you some CPEs.
And probably the most filling one would be the top here, so you can select that and you
will be shown the vulnerabilities for that version. Kind of important to mention here
is also that we immediately see in the third row that there's also vulnerability that doesn't
have a CPE identifier. And so if you just use CPEs and the NVD, you wouldn't be able
to find this. And that's just, again, beneficial to include multiple data sources. Speaking
of that, you could also see that gray log file for two is end of life and out of date,
which is kind of, which is provided by an integration for the end of life.date database.
Up here you can see that there's some filtering options, like first configuration, which I
won't go into detail now. And there's also filtering options where you can select only
certain vulnerabilities, for example. There's also, like, the attributes that you can select,
for example, you can decide to show the EPSS score, which, in this case, isn't available
because that currently only applies to CPEs, which first has it set up this way, the maintainer
of the EPSS. And, ultimately, what you want to do is export all of this so you can copy
that to Markdown or CSV into the clipboard and then paste into your report. Another career
I want to show you would be Tomcat 9022. And essentially, the only thing I want to show
here is this kind of warning here that it shows you, okay, this vulnerability is known
to have been exploited in the wild, which is managed by another module that kind of just
references this non-exploited vulnerabilities catalog. And there's also some other warnings
that I won't talk about in detail now, but they give you, like, more information about
vulnerabilities as well. Like, for example, if there's contradictions in the data sources,
you're made aware of that as a user and can then decide if it truly affects the software
create or not. One final career I want to show is GWT 572 on Debian 12, because there's
some kind of other message here that tells you, okay, typically the software would be
affected by these vulnerabilities, but Debian as the system, a distributor has fixed this
vulnerability in a back patch. And so, you see that this vulnerability doesn't affect
the software anymore. And also, here you see that it's up to date, though, and that just
uses the Debian security tracker. Right, and that's essentially about search
once there's some other things, for example, like, if you want to read more about how search
once works in detail, there's plenty of information. You can also ask me, and there's also a more
detailed video that goes into this, a little bit more details about the demo and the whole
CP concept and everything. And, yeah, it's essentially it with this, I would give it back
to Matthias to conclude the presentation. Thank you, Dusty.
All right. Final thing that Dusty also matters, so this is open source. It's also online already
available. We have QR codes. In a second, we also have stickers with us, which we can
share with you later. So, you can definitely check it out. It is super helpful for us in
our daily work, and therefore, we really, really enjoy using it, and we wanted to share
it with the community. Just to sum up the talk, I think we've seen there is, this is
a very complex topic in the ecosystem of vulnerability management. And, yeah, actually finding information
about non-vulnerability shouldn't be this hard. That's why we wanted to make a small
contribution with search once, and with that, I think we conclude the talk. Thank you very
much for your attention, and enjoy the conference.
Yeah, thank you, Matthias and Dusty. We have perhaps one minute time for a short question.
Is there any question to those? Yes, there is one.
Yeah, hi. Thanks for the presentation. I have a question. One of the challenges that
you presented at the beginning was the huge backlog of NVD. So, can you elaborate more
and why did you present it? How does your tools solve this issue?
So, the challenge is that the NVD is tasked with enriching the CVE data. So, the CVE gets
registered by the CNA, and then NVD starts to work on it with the information that is publicly
available, and it just has a huge backlog of doing so. And, by combining different data sources,
for example, the GitHub security advisories, some vendor security advisories, there is
even like a EU, European Union vulnerability database now. Different institutions and projects
try to pick up the speed when it comes to publishing this information and collecting this information.
And, by combining all of these different data sources and search ones, we want to make the
information as a whole more accessible. Wonderful. Thank you.
Once again, and... Thank you, Borona. Thank you. Enjoy the conference. Thank you.
