API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93553
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/god2025-56478-all-the-waf-power-to-the-d
Title: All the WAF power to the devs - why it reduces friction… and where it backfires

Welcome, everyone, to the second session for the day.
This one here is very OVASP-seemed for the next three talks, so you're on the right
room.
That's a good choice.
Lucas, here is joining us from Switzerland, it's also the home of Christian Follini of
the OVAS call rule set project, and Switzerland seems to be a rather protective country.
There are lots of application firewall experts in there, and Lukas is going to introduce us
a bit to the topic and show us the good and the bad about web application firewallings,
so I will not take all the time away by talking too much, so give a warm round of applause
for Lukas and the topic.
Hi everyone, thanks that you joined this talk.
I can talk about my favorite topic, web application firewalls.
You mentioned the call set, actually this week, there's a call set retreat happening
in Switzerland, so there are quite a few people who develop the call set and all that
stuff.
They meet once a year to develop it further, to meet each other, so it's quite cool.
One thing I have to be where I can be here, so that's quite nice.
In my experience, the web application firewall often feels more like a burden than it provides
benefit for the people.
Due to that, we try to find a different approach how a WAF can be deployed, and that's what
I tried to showcase a little bit today, our journey from the central WAF to a more app-centric
developer-friendly WAF.
As mentioned, Lukas, I work as a security solution architect at United Security providers.
It's a Swiss-based small company, about 60 people, and one of our key knowledge areas
are our application firewalls, amongst others.
So let's get started.
Besides me, there are other roles and people who likes good tune-to-off, like CSO, and here
you see some examples of obvious malicious requests.
The WAF blocks these, that's good, that's what you're supposed to do, and it's the essential
part of its job.
Depending on the size of your installation, you see easily 100,000 and more such requests
per month.
So that's just, we have to be very famous for that, it's just happening all the time.
So WAF blocking these things, take away a lot of traffic from which you don't want
in your application.
So WAF does its job, so CSO is happy, everyone is happy, right?
But not everybody likes WAF, and not talking about the hackers or the pen testers, it's
good thing they don't like that stuff, right?
I'm talking more about the web developers or the application owners because usually going
live and now moment, we need WAF, do you have WAF, oh, we forgot about that, and what's
happening usually, okay, you have to figure out, there's something blocking, let's put
that in detect mode, and well, what's happening then, well, probably you never get out of the
detection mode anymore, or maybe sometimes.
And I've seen enough WAFs which produce barely just a bit heat and no protection at all because
they were running detection mode for years.
And so that's one thing we wanted to try to understand why is this reaction, why, what
can we improve to do that?
And secondly, we didn't want to be always the scapegoat, say, oh, the WAF is the bloody
WAF.
So what challenges did we think, our isolates a little bit, I think that's the most important
part, WAF is usually always late, you develop something, you have a new application, and
then, oh, we need to go in production, yeah, CISO says we need a WAF, okay, and usually
break something, that's just the normal thing as it is.
So and, yeah, the second thing I think is really important, the WAF development usually
have different processes than software developers or application owners.
They do use different tools, I have seen rarely any WAF which can be integrated in a CI/CD
with the application together.
Usually you have a central WAF, maybe you have several stages, QA test, but if you start
with an application, you end up usually at some stage to integrate, to get the WAF.
So whatever you develop, you have no clue if it breaks something, if there's a rule blocking
some sport of traffic, all the tests are running without the WAF.
So I think that's a really big problem.
And due to that, also you have completely different configurations.
One, often the most central WAF have a UI, so you configure it there, you have your GitOps
process for the application, so when combining these things, it's really difficult.
And for that, it's something really difficult to release fast, like all this agility you
pray for all the time, if your process usually gets blocked by the WAF deployment.
And the last thing, you probably know the Mikado game, the pick a stick game, right?
So whatever you update, Coralset or any other application component, you never really know
what's happening with the WAF together if you break something.
And that's what I'm referring to, the update paralysis.
And the third thing is scalability and the availability.
If you even have hardware deployments of the WAF, scaling is really difficult, so we
have to set up at the peak load you're expecting.
If this is going higher, you're breaking the setup.
If you have a hybrid setup with multi-clouds, different clouds, usually it means you have
different web application firewalls for each environment.
And that's really, really difficult to, if you move from one hyperscape to the other,
you have to reconfigure the whole WAF and that's, I think, is a big problem.
So due to that, all these challenges, we came up with a vision called Appcentric WAF.
So basically we want to shift left, I know it's a bit tense word, but try to get a WAF
for each application.
Each developer should be able to use the WAF directly in the development process.
So it's early, all the tests can be run with the WAF together, and it's not just, like,
SAC DevOps gets a bit more of meat on the bone than just the buzzword.
So it should be integratable and the CI/CD process should be able to use GitOps processes
and, like, bring the connection of WAF functionality and application together.
And ideally, we can move it from one hyperscale to the other, so all this closed ecosystem
stuff can be, can go away.
And the last point I think is really important is of use, because you will figure, or that's
one of our lessons, WAFs can be quite complicated and cumbersome.
So we think it's really important to make that feature or the security part available
for everybody.
So like to show what we did, this is just how we did it.
There are other ways, other tools, how we can put everything together, it's just an example
how we did it.
We were focusing on Kubernetes deployments because it provides a great ecosystem with
tools and stuff, so we could focus on security aspect and not on the tooling part.
And Kubernetes is designed for extensibility.
So that's what we did.
So we're using a few post components, flagship project coralset.
Here as mentioned, I think if you're talking about WAFs and open source, you can't get
around CRS.
It's a really great project, they put a lot of effort in it.
Then the other project, the Corasa WAF, you might or not everybody knows about that.
You probably have heard mod security.
And corals is basically a drop in replacement, completely written in Go.
It has full compatibility with the seglang which mod security introduced and the CRS
is using.
And then we have Envoy proxy as the reverse proxy.
And what we did at the United Security Prize, we implemented a Go filter for Envoy using
Corasa.
It is a awesome implementation for Envoy as well, but we face there's some memory issues
and of support and of life issues.
So we came up with our initiative to implement the Go filter which allowed us to put all
these things together.
And then what we did is basically the management.
So we used our implant operator, Kubernetes operator to simplify the deployment of all
that stuff.
So what does that mean in the operator?
So this is the Kubernetes resources available, basically it's a unified API.
And you can extend it with so-called custom resource definitions that's down here which
your own stuff.
And that's what we did.
We built a Corasa WAF operator.
It's basically that's a configuration example.
It uses the same stuff as in old Kubernetes deployment, YAML structure.
We simplified some Coruset settings which you can allow to tune the WAF basically.
So how does that look like?
Here's the really, really simple Kubernetes deployment.
We have the ingress or gateway control part which brings traffic into the Kubernetes cluster.
And then we have the application itself which brings the code.
So what's happening?
We deployed the operator and have the Corasa custom resource.
With our setting and operator is then in charge of deploying all this basically the WAF itself.
A few words on the architecture which we've chosen, they're different approach how we could
set up these things.
First of all, we've chosen a separate deployment and service versus side-core patterns.
Side-core would basically add an additional container in the application code itself.
We choose the other approach because it's less intrusive and more simpler in overall.
It has also some drawbacks which I come to it later.
And another option would have been to put everything in the ingress or gateway controller.
And we also opted not for this option because the gateway controller or ingress controller
are really, really central parts of the Kubernetes cluster.
And if you come afterwards with the WAF functionality, that would mean you have to replace the
Android controller or gateway controller and we wanted to avoid that so that we actually
can go into existing setups with this approach.
So let me really, really quickly show you how that could look like.
So I have here the famous two-shop deployed in Kubernetes.
You'll hear about that a little bit later today.
For those who haven't heard of it, it's a really great application to show and learn
about that application security and there's a lot of flaws in it and it's also good to
demonstrate a bit of WAF capability or what it can do.
Remark, WAF cannot fix all issues.
So there's just a tiny bit of fraction but let's quickly show the really nicest SQL injection
approach, right?
So really simple and we are admin.
So that's a really good example how WAF can help you protecting these things.
So let's quickly, here I have an example of Coroz WAF custom resource.
You see there's not much configured, there are a lot of defaults, so everything is enabled
by default and just back end and for demo purpose I introduced a paranoia level, a paranoia
level for those who are not familiar with Coroz WAF is how strong the rules that should
be.
So there's level one to four.
One is basically area application should have it.
There should be no false positives at all.
So that's the aim of the Coroz set for a paranoia level one.
Then two is like e-commerce shop, three is online banking and four like well, critical
infrastructure, power plants, whatever.
So if you have a level four, expect a lot of false positives, a lot of tuning efforts,
do that only on very, very specific projects.
So let's apply that shortly.
What will happen is you see an additional pot, it's been spin up and the service and
now as mentioned in the diagram we have additional service, now we have to instruct the gateway
or the ingress that they actually go through the WAF and not directly to the application.
I do that, I have a gateway control install, I will patch the HTTP route so that it moves
through the WAF.
And hopefully the application is running still and often what's happening, so that
looks all good or maybe not, now you see a lot of stuff popping up, it's paranoia level
one but still there are some issues about, so you have to tune that.
Let's see what's happening here.
So there are a lot of errors but it's always the same, it's actually a specific rule which
prevents content types, so this socket connection, so it's a web socket trying to set up a web
socket connection with content type text plain which is per default blocked.
So we have to tune that away and we can do that with some additional
stuff settings that was, and so let's do that and at some points it should reload the
configuration.
And ideally these error vanish, so that's good, so at least obvious errors are gone.
That's good, let's check if the s-conjection is still here.
Nothing happened and if we go to the developer tools again, here we see, okay, four or three,
that's good.
So to also show a little bit the limits, the other of the parallel level one, so that's
also an obvious s-conjection and unfortunately this is not caught by the parallel one, it
is actually caught by the parallel level two, so we could switch that easily to the next
level, we have discussed that obvious s-conjection with the colon set developers and it's not
easy to fix because especially the s-conjection part is part of this lip sequence injection
and that's quite a cumbersome project so far and there needs to be a idea how to fix that.
So that's basically that.
So if you want to try it out, you, they're all on our GitHub pages or a GitHub organization,
you can find that thing there.
So lessons learned from that approach, well it's easy, right?
Well, probably not, as you can imagine, it is not and actually sometimes also not what
you want, especially when you talk about separation of duty.
But let's start with the achievements.
So we are able to use the WAF in our development process, everybody can use it, it can be tightly
coupled to the application code itself, every application has its own code, can be updated
individually.
So if an update breaks one application, all the other application can still be upgraded
with a new coralset or a new WAF engine or whatever.
I think that's a really great achievement and we're using the same tools, same workflows,
so it also gives transparency, you are able to have all the WAF changes which you need
for the application to cater with the code changes or the application changes.
So you can deploy these features step by step and, yeah, just a second.
So what are the drawbacks actually?
No-how is a really key thing.
The WAF experts are administration, sometimes know nothing about CI/CD processes, all this
tooling is completely new for them.
Vice versa, developers' knowledge about web application, firewall or spares, so there
is really lots to improve.
And so on one hand, each side needs to get familiar with the tools and the processes
from the other key expertise.
And I think a great way how to do that is actually kind of a review process for them,
because what you also, the risk, what you do with that approach is that you give a lot
of power to the developers and if they don't know exactly what they're doing, you can basically
carve bigger holes in the Swiss cheese as they should be.
And so you need an expert to review what the changes are actually doing to not fully open
the doors for everything.
The experience that kind of a managed service is quite a good approach.
So the WAF experts, depending on the skill level of the developers or the application
owner, they provide basically the same services they used beforehand with the centralized WAF.
So that they do the application integration together with the application owners, but
still they have the oversight and all the knowledge what to tune, how to tune and all
that stuff to provide that part.
And so that this separation of duty is still given, but more like a shared responsibility
still.
And last point here, ease of use, it's really important because if you have looked into
the call set in the tuning part, so that exception was actually easy to fix because
it was an obvious message and obvious application design, but to abstract this whole pattern
matching and false positive tuning at some point, that's really important, I think.
So it's not the golden bullet, there are quite a few topics to address.
And one very important topic, it's not on the edge, it's set up.
So all the traffic is already in your cluster before it reaches the WAF.
So there is malicious traffic in the cluster, it can affect it already.
And so all the, as you have the ingress or gateway control point, the TLS termination
is usually done there, all the IP address related blocking mechanism, you need to forward
this information to the WAF that it can actually do something with or do it in front of it.
So geo blocking, IP blocking, that's either late in the process or you need to do that
separately of the WAF.
And one thing I forgot about to mention, TLS termination, so MTLS used to be one job
of the WAF, now it cannot do it, so we need to figure out not the way how to do that.
Next topic, global virtual patching is cumbersome.
Now we get WAFs shooting out of the ground like mushrooms, each application has its own
WAF, how to address virtual patching on the global level is difficult.
Imagine like three years ago or four years, log for shell, so it was around that time
of the year, you need to patch all the WAFs at once.
It's really important that you have this functionality.
So far we couldn't find the satisfying solution for that problem yet.
With the operator we have means of implementing something like do, but we lose a lot of transparency.
Like we could say, okay, the operator deploys virtual patch to all WAFs at once, but then
you lose this information from the applications that you don't know that something has changed.
And that's lacking the transparency part.
So we're still finding a solution there.
And what you also lose with that approach is that you have like a central oversight
of your WAF policies.
So if you have a company policy enforcing certain standards, you don't have that view
at once.
So you need like a policy engine like kivern or opal to enforce this information or this
certain level.
And I think that's depending on the scale of your application important part that you
can ensure your security poster.
At the last point, I mentioned that, so now we have application, you have the WAF, and
you need to ensure that the application is only accessible via the WAF.
You need this, you can implement network policy, it's an additional effort to do that, but
that's actually what you should do that you're not bypassing the WAF by accident actually.
And yeah, I think that's really important.
In the same sense, but also also gain with that setup, with network policies, you can
do protection of inner cluster traffic as well.
So because it's not in the gateway, you have it all in a cluster so we can protect actually
also East West traffic.
So that's our journey which we are still going on, we're learning a lot of stuff all the time,
how we can improve support.
I hope you also got some insights and probably took something with you to how it could be
applied in your environment, what challenges, or maybe you're familiar with some of the
challenges.
Personally, I think it's a great way to improve the overall experience for everybody.
I'm involved and we have this setup in different customers, big customers actually, and they're
really happy about it and they're going forward with that approach on a bigger scale actually.
So yeah, I'm happy to discuss later also in a break or something, what your experience
is and thanks a lot for that.
Yeah, thanks a lot.
So do we already have questions, any questions here?
I do have a question.
So are you planning to protect all the juice shop, you mentioned earlier, it's not possible
to protect the whole juice shop, but are you planning to spend more time on protecting
more from the juice shop, the services set up?
Well, there are certain vulnerabilities which you cannot protect by both because they're
client-side vulnerabilities, so it's not possible to protect everything.
I know there has been some efforts to look at or list all the vulnerabilities which can
be protected by the core set for the juice shop, but I'm not sure where this information
is actually at the moment.
Do we have further questions?
Yes, there is one.
Thanks for the talk.
My question is you said you need to have an expert on WAFS ideally to use them.
So actually it's a two-part question.
So would you say don't use WAFS when you don't have an expert and the other question
is how much time would it cost to create such an expert?
Difficult question.
Well, actually to get a simple baseline that's not too difficult and it depends also a little
bit on your application.
So some application are well designed and there can work to get rid of perfectly.
And then it's also not a big learning effort I think, but especially with a bit older application
which don't have this predicament designed with it together, that there can be a wolf
in front of it, then it can be quite cumbersome.
And then you need a bit more time to speed up or to spin up an expert to that level.
But I think especially in the OVOS community, there are a lot of helpful resources to gain
that knowledge.
I think the core set is a really, really good starting point which protects a lot of stuff
already.
So I think to get started with the core set and such a setup, it's actually easier than
it used to be.
Thank you, and then further questions.
I see none.
They'll give a warm round of applause again to thank the speaker.
