API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93569
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/god2025-56481-phishing-for-passkeys-an-a
Title: Phishing for Passkeys: An Analysis of WebAuthn and CTAP

Welcome again. So, the next presentation will be by Mikhail Kukuk, and he will talk about
fishing past geese, and he will go to prison next week. Not because of fishing past geese,
he's also a working student and an engineer in Enovix, and an amateur actor in a theater
group which is playing in a prison. So, he does know how to fish for past geese, so
if you're interested in the security considerations, the risks, and whatever happens between, at
the seams of security, yeah, listen to Mikhail's presentation about past geese.
Yeah. Thank you very much for the kind introduction, and for coming by. I hope to not keep you
from lunch for too long. Before I dive into past geese, let's have a brief recap of fishing
in general. So, usually fishing works by, you know, attackers tricking their victims into
opening websites that usually imitate other websites that they know, such as Amazon or
Facebook. And then the victims think, okay, it looks like what I know, so surely it is
what I know, let me try and enter my passwords, and in that moment, you know, the attacker
just steals them and can do whatever they want with those. And ultimately, the only reason
why this works is because us stupid humans, we only rely on these stupid visual things
that fishing websites can imitate so easily. And now, some of you might say, well, skill
issue. Sadly, it's not a skill issue. Even the guy, the person who maintains how I've
been pawned has been pawned. So, no matter how much you know about fishing, you're not
really safe because it's social engineering. They're experts at, you know, exerting pressure
on you, and in those moments, you forget all of your training. Now, luckily, systems are
a bit smarter. So, password managers, for example, they just look at the URL, and they
see, okay, it's not what I was expecting. So, no passwords for you. The problem is that
a stupid humans, we see that, and then we're like, oh, why is my password manager not
working? Fine, I'll just paste it in manually. So, you know, this is an improvement, but
it still doesn't really fix the problem. And that's where pass keys come in, as Karimans
has kind of explained to us, they're really bound to a relying party ID. So, basically,
to a domain. And whereas for password managers, we can just extract the password with pass
keys, we can't really extract the private key out of the authenticator. At least, that's
the way it's designed. And so, that means that if a fishing website comes along and
says, hey, I want to request authentication for github.com, for example, the browser
says, nope, you're not github.com, not allowed. And so, the only options website have is to
request authentication as themselves, in which case, the browser says, okay, and it passes
the request through to the authenticator, but then the authenticator checks its database
and sees, well, okay, fishing.com, never seen that before, there are no credentials, sorry,
can't help you. And the thing that this communication between client and authenticator usually looks
something like this. So, usually, you have a hardware token, and it's plugged into your
device, and you can see it, you can touch it, it's great, or maybe it's even inherently
inside your device, it's your system authenticators, such as Apple's keychain or whatever.
And this is great. Users can see it, they can trust it, they are sure that the correct
devices are communicating with each other. The thing is, pass keys also have a feature
that I haven't mentioned yet, which is this QR authentication, which we've briefly seen
in cameences talk, where the way this works is the user clicks on login and they get this
magical QR code, and then they take their phone and scan it, and suddenly the computer
is signed in. And this is super convenient, especially if you've ever tried to sign into
like a smart TV or so. Absolutely terrible, this is great, but it's kind of magic. Like,
how exactly do they communicate? How does this work? And, you know, when I see magic,
my mischievous brain is like, "Ooh, I can mess with this." And so let's try and mess
with it. First of all, we need to look at, you know, what this actually is. We need to
distinguish between two different types of authenticator attachment. We have platform
attached authenticators, which are, you know, the authenticators that live inside the device
that also is operating the client, so, you know, again, your Apple keychain, for example.
And you have cross-platform attached authenticators, such as your hardware token or, you know,
the phone in the QR code case. And we are just interested in the cross-platform thing,
because that's where this communication happens. And that is specified by the client to authenticator
protocol. This protocol, you know, aside from all the cryptographic stuff that you would
expect, you know, encrypted messages, whatever, also limits what media can be used for transporting
these messages. And it's limited to, you know, USB, NFC, and Bluetooth low energy. And one
more that we'll get to in a moment. And the reason for this limitation is that all of
these media have inherent proximity guarantees, right? USB, you know, you plug one device
into each other, into the other, it works, like, you know, right here. With NFC, it works
up to a few centimeters, Bluetooth low energy, maybe a few hundred meters if you're lucky.
And so limiting it to these transports means that remote attacks are basically impossible,
which is really great. Now, the thing is for users, a lot of people don't want to have
to carry around USB tokens. They don't want to have to carry around a USB cable for plugging
in their phone. If you imagine, like, trying to authenticate with your smart TV and, like,
find the correct spot for NFC, like, it's a bit of a nuisance. So, you know, Bluetooth
low energy for users is the most convenient by far. But, of course, it also has its problems.
Whoops, that was a bit too fast. So, for example, it's slow, right? Packet size is very limited.
We can't really transport much data. And then it's also kind of unreliable. If you use Bluetooth
headphones, I'm sure you've had this experience where it feels like, you know, just holding
your hand the wrong way already makes it lose connection. And so, this kind of raises
birth to the other transport that I didn't mention, which is the hybrid transport. And
here the idea is that we use Bluetooth low energy for exactly one packet, and then we
switch to network, which means we get the proximity guarantee from Bluetooth, and then
the connection speed and connection quality of the Internet. And that is exactly what
we have in this QR code thing. So, the QR code contains information on, like, how to connect
via Bluetooth. Then we have one single Bluetooth packet, and then everything else happens through
a tunnel server. And, like, what this QR code does is kind of important here. Because the
QR code contains information, such as some cryptographic keys, that we need for the client
and the authenticator to be really sure that they're communicating with the correct other
client or authenticator respectively. So, the client needs to know that, like, you
know, it wasn't someone else who somehow is trying to send a Bluetooth advert. And so,
it needs to, sorry, the authenticator needs to prove that it actually has scanned the
QR code because there's some cryptographic material there. And from the other perspective,
and this is arguably a bit more important because you don't want to be signing in with
your phone, and then all of a sudden you sign someone else in, the client also needs to
prove that it actually generated the QR code that the authenticator then scans. And this
is great, right? So, now we know, okay, it's the correct devices that are communicating
with each other because my authenticator knows for sure the client is communicating
with generated the QR code. This is great. Until that is, you notice that just because
a client generated a QR code doesn't mean that's the device you scanned it from. And
this is where the -- this is, like, the crucial idea for the attack I'd like to walk you through.
So the idea is that an attacker -- where's my mouse? Yeah, good enough. The attacker
generates a QR code based on the request options that it gets from the server. And then it
just pipes that QR code through to a phishing page. This is supposed to be read, but I guess
the projector isn't really handling it well. Anyhow, so this is the phishing page. And then
the victim just, you know, opens the phishing page, clicks on login, whatever scans the
QR code, thinking that now it's connecting to its own device because, you know, the QR
code was from its own device. But instead, you know, the QR code contains information
that instructs the authenticator to connect to the attacker's client. And once that happens,
the attacker can just forward the credential response and gets, I don't know, adjacent
web talk and, for example. And so, you know, this has a bunch of ifs and buts, right?
In this attack, a victim has a lot of chances to recognize that something's going wrong.
First of all, they need to fall for the phishing email. They need to fall for the phishing website.
They need to fall for being forced into this QR code process, right? Because if they could
just use their hardware token, this entire thing doesn't really work. And so, you know,
they're being forced into a bunch of things which could work or could be detected. If
it works, though, they still need to complete, you know, face ID, for example, on their phone
or some kind of authentication. So, like, it's really a high-effort thing on the victim's
side. They need to complete many steps. And arguably, the most important if, or buts
or whatever, is that the attacker needs to be within Bluetooth low-energy range of their
victim at the time of authentication. So, like, it's not sufficient to be there maybe
at the time where you send this beer-phishing email. But rather, you need to maybe be in
the same train, for example, as your victim while the victim is trying to scan the QR
code. Or you could also just, you know, set up some sort of Bluetooth beacon and maybe
plant it in the parking lot of the victim's company. So, all of those things would work,
but still, this is, like, a very high threshold. And so, you know, you might actually care
about this if you do use past keys already for authentication, perhaps even exclusively.
And if you expect this kind of, you know, highly skilled and highly motivated attacker
that will come by in person and either be there at the time of their attack or at least
plant a Bluetooth beacon somewhere close. And if this is you, you might be like, "Okay,
this is problematic. I want to disable this QR code thing completely." And so, the question
is, can we? And to answer this question, we look at the two protocols that are in play
here, C-Tap and WebAuthn. C-Tap, again, regulates this communication. And sadly, based on C-Tap,
there is no chance. Because C-Tap happens without any involvement of the relying party,
which is, you know, kind of a feature because it means you get all of this nice QR code
stuff for free. You don't have to implement a single thing and you just get it. But in
this case, it's a bit of a disadvantage because we can't really prevent this attack from happening
based on C-Tap. Based on WebAuthn, we have a bit more of a chance because WebAuthn has
two properties, one in the request options and one in the response where we can try to
prevent hybrid transport from ever happening in the first place. And we can detect after
the fact whether the authenticator that was used was attached platform or cross-platform.
And to see whether this actually works, let's have a brief live demo and hope that it works.
So this is a bit of a complicated setup. Let me -- or let's first just pay attention to
this website. This is a brief demo that I implemented, which attempts to do this detection,
and I would like to demonstrate that to you if the demo gods are with me, which they are.
So here I fire up the QR code, which I will briefly scan. All right. So I'm trying to
do cross-platform authentication and as soon as I authenticate to my phone, there we go.
We see this error message, which shows us that the server has detected that cross-platform
authentication happened, so yay, we can disable it. Great. But if this is so easy, then why
is there so much other stuff? Well, now we come to kind of the attack of all of this.
In this attack, this will be an attacker-controlled browser, which is just used to take WebAuthn
off of my shoulders. I don't want to implement all of this stuff on my own. So I'm just orchestrating
this browser by the script here, and this will be the victim's browser, right? So the
victim has this phishing site opened, you know, after being spearfished. And now what
happens is the attacker tries to generate this QR code based on request options from
the server, and now the victim gets this QR code, which you can see is different because
it was just forwarded, but like, of course, in a real phishing attack, the attacker would
try to make it authentic. Now, I will briefly try to scan the bottom QR code. You'll have
to believe me that I'm scanning the bottom one. And in just a moment, you'll be able
to see that, despite me scanning the QR code from the victim's browser, it's the attacker's
browser that's doing -- that's showing the WebAuthn UI. And once again, this is taking
way longer than usual, but it's fine. I still have the time. Famous last words. Maybe there's
just too much happening in this room. All right, fine. I'm calling it. Never mind, then you'll
just have to believe me that it would have worked, right? I would have been authenticated.
We would have seen the user data. In fact, I have a blog post written about this, and
there you have like a recording of this demo, so in case you don't believe me, you can look
it up there. Anyhow, let's look at why this happens. And the reason for that is very simple
with my mouse. These are the two objects that I was talking about, right? The request options
and the response options. And I highlighted with the red alarm thing, which properties
were interested in using for, you know, prohibiting this QR-based flow. And I also took the liberty
of highlighting all properties that have integrity protection. Sadly, they're highlighted in gray
and you can't see them. Basically, it is, you know, this entire box here. Everything
with the lock symbol and, you know, the sub properties. And you might be able to tell that
the properties that we would want to use to disable this QR code thing have no integrity
protection, meaning we can just manipulate them as we wish, and no one has a chance of
detecting that that's happening. And so that's what I was doing in this brief demo. And sadly,
that means that also based on WebAuth, we have no chance of disabling it. And so, in
total, as a relying party, you have no chance. So what other options do we have? Maybe you
could say, okay, then I'll just limit all authenticators to being these USB hardware
tokens, right? Because those don't have any cameras. They can't scan anything. I'm good,
right? Sadly, no. Dennis Kniep has found out that if you plug a hardware token into your
Android phone, the Android phone will just do the QR code stuff for you and forward all
of the messages to the hardware key. So on iOS, this doesn't work. But on Android, sadly,
it does. So even if you limit all of your authenticators to just these hardware keys,
you're still vulnerable. What other options do we have? Of course, you could somehow add
more levels of authentication. So for example, you could -- why did this happen? Sorry about
that. You could make sure that, you know, only devices that have been registered with your
company are able to maybe even access the website you're trying to protect. And that,
of course, would work, but that's a lot of effort. Another option would be to improve
the standards, WebAuth and then CTAP. Sadly -- so there's already a discussion happening
with the W3C and a few people, including myself, are trying to convince them to, you know,
improve the standard here and add some integrity protection to these properties. My impression
is that they don't really feel like this is a necessity. I feel like, you know, this
is a very high security kind of threat model that Web -- sorry, pass keys aren't really
designed for. So my impression is that this isn't going to happen anytime soon. So you'd
have to revert to option 1. And then, of course, there always is this hypothetical third option
of educating users. And, in fact, we have more chances than with usual passwords to do this.
Because if you take a very detailed look at this screenshot from Chrome, you'll be able
to see that the UI that displays the QR code slightly overlaps with the bookmarks UI. And
this is something that websites cannot do, at least in my knowledge. And because websites
can do it, that means phishing sites can also not do this. So if you see this kind of overlap,
that is a 100% guarantee, at least right now, that this is actually rendered by the browser
and not by some phishing sites. The problem is that if you don't have a bookmark bar,
this doesn't happen. And if you use a different browser, such as Safari, you know, it's just
rendered dead in the center of the window, which is well within the space that's controlled
by the website. So this could be faked by phishing sites. So, in theory, you know, browsers
could do better here. And users have yet another opportunity to detect that something's wrong,
right? Because the website would have to imitate this UI instead of it being rendered
by the browser. But, you know, chances of users detecting this, especially in these,
like, high pressure scenarios are very slim. And, you know, if we could just rely on user
vigilance, then pass, sorry, then phishing wouldn't be a problem in the first place.
So I don't really think this is a good idea to rely on that. And, yeah, that brings me
to my summary. So, to sum it up, like, regular phishing is still safe. You can't really
fish pass keys with regular phishing. You need spear phishing, and you need to be there
in person as an attacker. And that limits this attack to, like, very, very few scenarios.
But if that is you, you might want to protect against this, in which case, you will probably
have to add more layers of authentication than just relying on pass keys. That's it so far
from my side. As I mentioned, I wrote a blog post on this, which feel free to read if you
want more details, especially about the technical stuff. Yeah, if you have questions, feel free
to ask them now. Or if you come up with a question later on, there are my contact details.
Feel free to get in touch. And, yeah, thanks a lot for listening. Enjoy lunch and enjoy
the rest of the conference.
