API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93511
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/god2025-56471-welcome
Title: Welcome

Good morning.
Dusseldorf and everybody.
Welcome to the 15th edition of German overstay since 2008.
I hope you all had a great time so far.
Yesterday evening.
Okay.
Everybody's quiet.
Okay, we try our best to amuse you and entertain you.
I'm Dirk from Hamburg and I give you a short introduction what's going on in this program
today.
But before I dive into that I have somebody standing next to me which is the reason why
you are here in Dusseldorf because he raised his hand one year ago and said okay I'm volunteering
to do the local organization stuff in Dusseldorf so that's the reason why you're here.
So give a round of applause to Christian.
So hi also from my side and welcome to Dusseldorf and on the behalf of the whole organization
team it's awesome that you are all here and we're looking forward to a really exciting
conference I think.
We are completely sold out this year with 200 people so please 201, 201 okay.
So please do not block any seat and try to move as close in as possible so that people
can take the seats on the sides.
This year I think it's the first time that we have two parallel tracks in the German
overstay.
Well in Munich like 2010, 2011.
Okay so it's the second time.
But as we talk about the tracks I want to give you some organizational notes here.
So you clearly found track one that's great so perfect.
Track two is right behind this wall.
You can only change tracks through outside so go outside and then into track two.
The program for each track is printed on sheets in front of the room and it's also of course
outside in the web on the website.
We had one change though for the program Martina is sick who wanted to talk about pass keys.
Clemens Hupner is stepping in with the same topic so there won't be any glitch for you.
Just the person who's standing on the stage is different.
Okay great and we try to group the sessions between the brakes.
So in theory there should be a little reason to change the tracks between the brakes and
as we have a really full program we would ask you to if possible not change the room
between the brakes and also we have the seat three VOC here, one applause for them.
And they are recording the program and they are also live streaming it right now in the
internet.
And so if you miss one talk you can also of course hopefully look it after this event.
Here we are at the brakes.
If you hear the gong please come in here quickly because we have not so much time.
And the emergency exits that's of course something we do in Germany every time.
They have signs and don't block them and yeah.
So brakes and lunch will be in the entrance room where you just came in and we have also
a second break from besides track two we can ask you to not use this room beside track
two during the sessions because you don't want to interrupt session two by noices.
Okay then one note as every year our sponsors who make this event possible like this have
prepared some goodybacks for you.
They are on the chairs if you if it happens to you that you don't get a goodyback then
please come to us at the front desk and we will give you another one.
We will be taking photos during the event if you feel uncomfortable with that and just
talk to the volunteers and they are easy to spot they will read badges as Dirk and myself
too or a little bit there.
And as we talk about the volunteers I give a warm applause for all the volunteers helping
here to get this conference running.
And of course if you have any questions during the event please contact one volunteer and
we will help you with that.
And one last more thing we really rely on your feedback to get this the impression of
the conference and what we can do better next time and we have QR codes around the place.
Please do that and if you provide feedback please make sure that you submit the form you
don't need to answer every question but submit it because otherwise we won't see it.
All right so that's enough for the logistics enjoy the conference have a fantastic time
here in Dusseldorf and with that back to you Dirk.
Okay thank you very much.
As Christian said also this year this program this year's program marks the change for the
vendor we have two tracks which we didn't have before and as I said we worked out.
And we also have a keynote which I come in a sec to that and yeah the number of submissions
this year is again getting higher so we had even trouble to find the right balance between
the submissions and getting a place on the stage.
So as a result we needed also for some speakers to condense the presentation time a little
bit and we had to say sorry to some really good proposals.
But there will be a conference next year so all of you who submitted and didn't get a
feed into the door please try again.
So coming to the topics which are awaiting you.
So Germany is very strong as far as the research community is concerned.
So we have a couple of talks from researchers in Germany but we also have over projects
which are strong in Germany there are some two new overs project.
One is the over secure code box and the other one is the overskumulus which we present
here and the overstop 10 is not a German thing but we have a participant from Germany who
is presenting the current status of the upcoming overstop 10 and finally in the end we will
have some fun certainly with the Jus shop who is sending us home and as every year James
John sorry yeah so that we have a final a good end of the conference.
Other than that we have a good mixture of topics for developers, breakers, defenders
and so on just a quick survey so who is more on the developer side please raise your hands.
Okay that's not so bad, who is on the breakers side, penters and so on okay that's equal
defender, deaf ops, managers kind of good okay quite a good mixture this time I would
say yeah one topic which is unavoidable these days is the thing called AI.
I think you always had some experience with it everybody from you probably sitting in
the audience so last year we introduced related overs projects to AI this year it's a little
bit orthogonal to that because it's basically in the couple of talks and topics here.
