API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93649
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/god2025-56496-closing
Title: Closing

Thanks. So stay with us for another like two minutes, I guess. Because in the end, I'm
going to reveal the date and the location of the next German overstay so you can grab
your hotel already for cheap price for next year. I did. Of course. So yeah, it's a closing.
So, thanks for coming. And as you all might have noticed, again, that this is mainly run
by volunteers. I got a short list with me. Most of them are here, so please stand up, guys.
So it's Christian, Christian, Lilith, Derek, Henry, Kai, Martina, and Yasmin of the, let's
say, local team. So they did the whole organization of this, and they made it possible that we
are here, so please stand up and please give them a warm round of applause. Thank you, guys.
I hope you enjoyed the talks. Did you?
OK, and also there you need some volunteers in the program committee and you need people trying to get a slot here as a speaker and finally standing here as a speaker and sharing insights and thoughts. So thanks for the program to the program committee and all of you speakers and
(audience applauding)
And hey internet, thanks for being with us.
We just had the streaming numbers.
So at least like 50 people were following us online
all the day, which is quite nice.
It's the fourth of all the people attending this,
this on-site meeting.
So thanks to CITRAI VOC for streaming
and all the PA stuff here and making it possible
that you can see all talks online right now.
So the morning, I think, all the talks of this morning
are already online to be, yeah, watched by you guys.
So thanks to CITRAI VOC and SoundMagic
for PA streaming and stuff.
Thanks so much.
(audience applauding)
And last, last, last, last, last.
and the staff did quite well, I think no one is in this room of the staff at this moment, but hey,
rather than guys, thanks so much.
(audience applauding)
And even a wasp is a non-profit organization.
We need to do, we need to
invoice you guys for buying a ticket, but I think it was affordable, right?
So, and this is made by
possible by volunteers because we don't get any money for that.
First of all, and second,
we've got some brave sponsors over here.
You don't need to applause for them.
But yeah, again, thanks to those companies which had just helped to make it affordable
and to be able to run such an event.
All right, that's it, so, as promised.
Grab your hotel now, we're gonna be in Karlsouille.
(audience applauding)
So we again found some crazy guys
doing an on-site conference with more than 200 people.
So yeah, thanks already, and yeah.
Thanks for being with us, have a great way back,
and hopefully the Deutsche Bank would do its thing.
Not, so yeah, see you next year.
Thanks everybody, bye.
(audience applauding)
