API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93577
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/god2025-56484-the-automation-illusion-wh
Title: The Automation Illusion? What Machines Can't Do in Threat Modeling

Okay, so today we are going to be talking about the paradigm that we've been seeing with
chat GPT coming into the world about three years ago.
And again, for the 10th time in humanity, we thought, oh, now this new technology is going
to make sure that we only have to work three days a week.
And I don't really think that it's going to be true this time either.
But we're going to see how this evolution can help us.
So it's always nice to know who's standing in front of you.
My name is George Bolson.
I work for the Belgian company Torium as an application and product security consultant.
I'm not going to read you through my whole resume if you want to connect with me on LinkedIn.
You're more than welcome to do so.
I'm the only person on LinkedIn with this name as far as I know.
So I know that slide deck content-wise, we are quite strapped for time, so I'm going
to hand over to my colleague Saba.
All right, thank you, George.
And so my name is Sebastian Dersner, as far as I know I'm also the one on LinkedIn, so
should not be too hard to find me.
I have a background in development and security.
I am the CTO, co-founder of Torion in Belgium.
We also do lots of trainings professionally, but also as a volunteer, I've been quite
active in OASP, in particular for the OASP-some projects of first-year insurance maturity models.
So, if ever you're involved in setting up a secure development lifecycle and need a framework,
this is the one you should be looking for. Also in Belgium, if you'd like these kind
of conferences, we also organize a German OASP day, but then in Belgium and together with
the Netherlands and we call it the OAS-Bennelogs day. So, it's next week, Tuesday, completely
free paid for by the sponsors, really nice line-up and also a second day of training.
So, if you still have time, it's not so far. It's in a very beautiful city of a megalon.
With that, to the topic, who of you are already familiar with trap modeling? Most of you, okay?
Who of you is really successful in scaling this? Okay, all right. I think that's really
the challenge that we're facing because software is scaling very hard, especially in our days
with AI. And so what we see with treadmill link, it's really too slow for modern development.
It's a very messy human centric approach. We need people that are not available. We need
human expertise and in particular security expertise, which is very scarce. It's also
, we need to solve this.
be be be be be be
be be be be be be be be be be be be be be be be be
are quite good at certain parts and certain domains, specifically like mathematics, reading,
writing, knowledge. But there's a lot of other cognitive domains that are really not covered
by the current models, like long term memory, visual reasoning, speed and so on. So there
is still definitely room for improvement. But if you know, and there's definitely an
evolution. Also nowadays we have very recently Gemini 3, we have the new opus 4.5, so there's really
speeding up. So maybe we can come to what we would call like a trap modeling general intelligence.
Some of you might recognize Adam Schostak in this picture, so he has the boogled trap modeling,
so we just need to like integrate him and assimilate him with a gen AI and then he will probably trap
model everything for us in the far future. Question is how far are we from that point in time?
With that, we obviously will need tooling and some of you might know some kind of trap modeling
tools. We've also as part of the research for this presentation looked at what kind of tools are
currently available to do all this stuff for us and there are quite a lot of tools. So over the
last couple of years, you see here like the first tool was in 2001, but nowadays we have more than
50 trap modeling tools. It's really due to the scope of doing trap modeling automating. It's not
frameworks, not methodologies, these are tools. What you also see in yellow or in orange is this
that the integration of generative AI really speeds this up. Question is how is this going to
help us doing trap modeling? Here's the list of all the trap modeling tools afterwards provided
with a pointer to get access to this. But how are these tools going to help us to do better
trap modeling? For that, it's probably better to first understand different steps and then
George is going to talk us through that.
So the show of hands that Saba asked for a little bit ago I saw about, I think half of the hands
go up roughly of people who know what threat modeling is. I'm going to first walk you through
a very high speed. What are the stages of threat modeling and where can you automate them? For that,
the dice framework is another way of naming the four question framework. If that rings a bell,
it's the same in a different wrapping. The first question you have to wonder when your threat
modeling is system is what are we actually working on? Diagramming or describing doesn't
really matter the D and dice can represent both of those words. But first you need to know what you
are working on. If you have no complete view of what you're working on, it's going to be very
difficult to know what can go wrong with that system. Incomplete answer to the first question
is going to make you miss things by answering or in answering the second. Something that often
gets overlooked. I see a lot of hate on LinkedIn towards diagramming your systems to actually do
threat modeling. I think it's still very useful because the question when we work with clients as
consultants on threat modeling, you would think that the first question is a very easy one to answer.
I'm going to guarantee you that four out of five threat models that I make when we start out,
we simply never get to a proper answer to the first question. Teams who develop systems
barely have a complete view of what they're building. That sounds scary but that is the case
with the majority of the organizations that I work on. A lot of knowledge does not get retained,
a lot of knowledge was in the heads of people that left the company and then there you are
with an incomplete answer to the question what are you working on. Hence you can also never properly
assess what can go wrong. Assuming that you have a good view on what can go wrong, you are going to
look at what are we going to do about it. If you stop here, then you just have a list of panic points
and you're never going to sleep again. Obviously you need some resolve to this. So then we need to
figure out what are we going to do about it. These three steps are usually the breath and butter
of threat modeling. The last question or the last step that evaluates that is listed here as the
last step of threat modeling but actually you can see it as something that you can fit into those
first three questions as well. You can evaluate whether your diagramming is good enough. You can
then evaluate whether your threat elicitation is good enough. First so when we look at diagram
automation, who of you has ever heard of the two eraser?
Show of hands, I see one hand up, two hands. Someone in the workshop that I taught yesterday
learned about it yesterday. So eraser is basically a vibe diagramming tool so you can just, you have
a chat interface and you can copy paste your architecture in there. You can also link it up
to a GitHub repository where it will draw wireframe diagrams of all the different screens that are
in your application. So this is becoming a bit of the future of diagramming. You just talk about
what you want to see drawn and this thing will draw the diagrams for you. As a lot of different
types of inputs, text inputs being the one that you see on the screen right now. Also mermaid syntax
if you already had diagrams as code that you can just copy paste in there and it will create better
layouts for that and then you can start chatting with this thing to say oh no I want this block
to be on the right side of the diagram. You can just tell it you don't have to manually move. So
a lot of things are happening in the diagramming space. Eraser has been around for about a year or
two now and it is getting increasingly better. So depending on how you configure it, there's a lot
of bells and whistles attached to it but it's one of the leading tools when it comes to AI native
diagramming tool. So this is an example of a complete architecture together with all of the
subgraphs that it would, if you would have to draw this in a diagramming tool like draw over video
or code it together and mermaid it would take you a few hours. This comes together in less than a
minute from an architecture. It goes very fast. Stride GPT so when we move out of the diagramming
realm we go into the realm of threat elicitation. Stride GPT, move you has ever heard about it
apart from the workshop that I gave yesterday. So this is a tool that you can completely run
locally as a Docker container and you can select the model that you hook into it. So it doesn't come
with a brain so to speak you can select the LLM that is attached to it. As you can see a lot of the
leading large language models are included but you can also run local tools like Olama and LLM
studio I think is also one of those but that got cut off from my screenshot. So if you prefer to
run a local tool with a local LLM you can do that with Stride GPT. You can also hook it up to a
GitHub repository so if you give it your GitHub API key you can make it in just all of your
code from GitHub and then start threat modeling that. So this is something that
is going to move that forward in all of the repositories that you already have in trust.
Once you, I'm going to go one slide back. So once you go into this text box and you
paste your whole application architecture in here it will generate a threat model. It will
categorize it towards the Stride categories that it thinks it falls into best because as you may or
may not know Stride is not a mutually exclusive framework. Some things can fall into two Stride
categories but here there's single categorization it can draw attack trees from that so which order
of attacks is going to lead to the apex point of ultimate compromise and it will also suggest
it also has some risk scoring modules in there. There's a lot to explain. Also when your architecture
was lacking details it will also tell you that it might benefit from having more detail to be
more thorough in its analysis. From the same creator we have TM bench so this is a bit of a
benchmark of if you choose to run your LLMs locally which locally hosted LLMs that you run
on your own infrastructure, your laptop or a server that you control how well do those home
run a both LLMs, how well do they perform when you start doing threat modeling with them.
This benchmark pre assumes that you don't have a complete 19 inch rack full of NVIDIA cards.
It is doing what you can feasibly run on consumer grade affordable hardware. It then uses
Cloud 3.7 sonnets. I think a newer model is going to come out soon to be the better LLM as a judge
which anonymously compares the output of all of these then weights the scoreings across
four different factors and then creates a mapping. This is obviously research that is
ongoing that is changing as soon as new models are coming out. This is something that will evolve
over time but it paints a clear picture where for example here the top five is very very close
to each other. This is also what you see over here. The difference between number five and number
one is barely four percent so the performance there is going to be.
We're also seeing a lot more integration in tools that are closer to developers so
when you look at Deepan Shark, quite a well-known name in the threat modeling community,
he created a tool based on Slack. If your company is already working with Slack as a messaging platform
what you can do is you can upload diagrams into a specific Slack channel and there is a threat
modeling bot that you can talk to so you give it everything you want to give it. You're already
trusting Slack for everything else and then it starts analyzing everything you've put into it
and then you can start having a dialogue with this robot. This is the first level triage
that you can already start doing. In a second level security champions can follow up on that
and they can start evaluating what has been put in there and in the last instance you can have
a number of your threat modeling experts or your cyber security experts review everything
and then validate what has been going on. Obviously having a human in the loop is arguably the best
idea because one of the largest problems that we have with LLMs is that they make stuff up. We
call it hallucinations which is a bit of a weird word to use in that context but these are things
that you definitely still want a human in the loop to start looking at was this a thing or was
this not a thing. At this point in time this robot has about the skill level of a new training so
you hire someone with a degree in cyber security who knows something about threat modeling and they
will be able to get that first rough cut here in the first level. This is something that with
this kind of tooling can be automated. You already have a first rough division of what are the 10
most important things and divergence may happen but I would like to argue that even though like
Seba just said if I make a threat model and Seba makes a threat model and all of you threat
modeling experts make a threat model they're all going to look a little bit different just like a
penetration test. Every pen tester does their job in a little bit of a different way. It would be weird
that the top five would not be very similar the most critical issues everyone's probably going to
five and the more you go down that list the more differentiation you will have. But it can
already make a very good rough cut. If you are an Atlassian shop you already have a lot of your
knowledge and confluence in Jira. Lucian Corland a guy from the UK he has created an agent in
rovo. So rovo is the AI system that's embedded in the Atlassian suite. He built an agent to actually
be a security architect. So now all of the knowledge and all of the methodologies that you already
have in your Atlassian suite this agent can start performing a threat model. So your organization
methodology and examples of these are previous threat models that we've made. All of this is
going to be fed into there.
Quick disclaimer this is still in an alpha state. So while these initiatives exist you do still see
some oversights and some false positives in there. So do not outsource all of your thinking to hear
and throw out your whole security team. I would not advise you to do that.
Also how are companies implementing this kind of philosophy? So when we look at KPMC,
JP Morgan Chase they've done quite some research on how to
automate this and how to build AI systems to help them with this threat modeling challenge. So
they've created the AITMC the AI threat modeling co-pilot which right now with Microsoft also
having a product named co-pilot is a bit of an unhappy choice but they stick with it.
So what they've been doing they've been having this fine-tuned model create threat models and
then have that reviewed by humans and it's from the results we can see. So this is also a graph
from this research paper. Number seven over here was a very clear outlier which was a which was a
hallucination. Number one jury was not very convinced but all of the other ones human reviewers
agreed that what the robot output was in general if you look at the two blue markers here agreed
or strongly agreed that the threat statements that came out and the threat model overall was
actually a good threat model. So of course JP Morgan Chase they have how big is their security
department? A few hundred people at least. Yeah so you also have to look at the scale of these
things they have a lot more a lot more people who are working on this obviously so they can
afford to do this kind of deep research. This is a quote from Pat Opa the CISO of a JPMC I'm going
to be quiet for a second so you can read this because this for me is a very powerful statement
from a security.
What for me is especially important is this last bit over here helping engineers understand
why controls are important and not just telling people I'm the cyber security expert I'm going to
come and tell you what to do and I don't want you to argue with me this is how it's going to be and
if you don't like it you can that's not the way to treat people as a security professional you're
there to help people create a more secure product and helping people understand why something is
important is going to make sure that threat modeling at some point drives itself but this is a very
very powerful outcome of this kind of research which as threat modeling professionals I would
actually love to be out of a job at some point because then that means that all developers
have grasped threat modeling and they are doing that not that I don't like threat modeling I love
doing it but it would the world would be a better place of every developer inherently and every
architect inherently would develop secure software that would be great.
More scientific research so this is an example of a research paper where researchers were taking
the Microsoft threat modeling tool as an input I can already maybe hit a few holes in that research
if you've ever worked with a Microsoft threat modeling tool keep your hand up if you like the
Microsoft threat there we go yeah okay so it's it's a free tool it's from Microsoft maybe we're
already predisposed to remind so the things that came out of there are threat statements whether
they're good or bad doesn't really matter what they then did is they fine-tuned a model and started
looking at the returns that came from fine-tuning a model this is definitely not a talk where we
have the time to go really deep into the technical nitty gritty of fine-tuning an LLM to do something
but if you want to specialize in LLM to be really specific about something fine-tuning is really
the way to go and this is also something when you use low rank adaptation or laura as a fine-tuning
mechanism it actually goes a lot faster than you would think on an m1 macbook you can fine-tune
a 7 billion parameter model with about a thousand examples in a few hours this is this is not
something that you need an NVIDIA cracking rig for to do it in a month you can you can actually
do that quite fast you talk my stations that the laura algorithm provides
one strange contrast that I'm seeing and this is something that's also part of my ongoing research
is to see what were the decisions behind this research and why does it contrast with what Matt
Adams was doing with TM bench because the model that was used over here researchers said yeah this
is this is in our opinion the best model to do it with it was llama seven billion and that is nowhere
to be seen in what came out of TM bench so there i'm still wondering a few questions of how to tie
that together but that is something we are we're at the cutting edge of then we've already been
talking about artificial general intelligence so the idea that you can just tell a robot this is
your job go out into the world go and do that job for me and i am expecting good results
and if we look at this is what we call the remote labor index so that's a research that
actually measures how good are current state-of-the-art models at actually doing this and success rates
are very very very low obviously the landscape of LLMs has changed a little bit meanwhile with the
recent recent release of new Gemini and cloud models i am not seeing the new Gemini model to
all of a sudden go up to 80 success this is those models improve but they don't improve that much
so i'm still not seeing our jobs as threat models and cybersecurity professionals being
completely eradicated by by AI but there is still a long way to to go and tooling is a very important
part of these tools can help us but they're not going to do the complete job so the human
involvement in all of this is still really important you also have to appreciate that this was a
conversation that yesterday during drinks we were having about when you purely look at quantitative
risk and you're purely looking at how to make decisions in excel it completely ignores the human
factor of it my company philosophy in how do i appreciate risk that makes my clients sad but
they're still paying me do i do i want to threat model against that or am i just about i want to
keep my clients alive so they can pay me and that's it like how do you balance that as a company and
this is where i still think that human instinct needs to still be retained in all of this because
as Nick Cave at one point said AI can write a song but AI does not know what it feels like
to lose a child though they can never write a song about that they can mimic that sentiment
it's going to be very difficult to get that sorted which brings us to the illusion of automation which
see if i can speak better too thank you so what we've seen here is that
to do threat modeling there's a lot of advancement in tooling but i should probably know
threat modeling is not only done with the tool the tool will not generate the full threat model
and threat modeling is itself also not the goal the goal is really together with the product team
and we involve stakeholders to build more secure products so and for that to happen we need way
more than just the tool so its automation will support us in doing threat modeling and hopefully
we'll make it better threat models but it will not solve the threat modeling scaling issue in the
near future it's also something we need to make sure that developers own as a process as a tooling
and there we see a good advancement because the tools get closer to their tool set it can be
integrated in their githubs it can be integrated in their tooling but still we need to be able to
get their buy-in to help them do this and to convince them to do this and that's not something
that the tool by itself will do they will not automatically go to that slack channel to interact
with the threat model both and and really what i see and what we see all always it is really also
a soft skill threat modeling it is about the human interaction it's about the understanding
of the challenges together with a group of people where the process itself of threat modeling is
at least as important if not more important than the outcome it's about realizing where the challenges
are how the system works what potentially can go wrong how we can fix it how to come to a shared
vision on security and while tooling can support is there in the end most of this is human interaction
and the interaction itself is very valuable so we really should focus on what we call human
centric threat modeling where we leverage automation where we leverage ai to augment what we do
but it should not and it will probably not very soon replace our human creativity and
for becoming better threat models will really lead to be creative and the future here of threat
modeling is really that collaboration so how can we become better and i would say not only
as threat models but also as security an application security specialist in leveraging this kind of
tool and there it's i would say i would recommend you if you if you have a chance look at the recording
of daniel miesler he did the keynote at the owasp us conference a couple of weeks ago on how do we
leverage ai about the different stages of using ai in our tool set in our way of working and where
we've come through the phases of an aided we're not using ai we have some chat assistant where we just
do some prompting we're now in the phase where there's agents involved and we fire up agents to do
stuff for us but it's going to go towards the next stages of how can we create intelligent workflows
where we can fire up these agents have these interactive chats with the different development
teams and build up threat models in a consistent way and share the results throughout the organization
in a way that it's easy and accessible but we still have a human control over this
and we really need to go into the mindset or the way of working and there's an analogy here
of working like a surgeon i don't think we'll ever don't need a human threat model anymore
but we need to make sure that we're coming in at the moment when our expertise is the most
valuable where we have the most impact and that's really also how a surgeon works and the surgeon
goes into an operating room everything is prepared the patient's already there maybe already got
open or whatever but he or she will do what he is really best at and that's also what we as security
specialists should try to get into that situation where we can help a product team or a group of
developers to make those final decisions to really make sure that we have a team of people
and ais worked closely together and handle that complexity and build up our expertise on threat
modeling and how to become better at it likewise how surgeons do it so i don't think it will be
out of a job really soon i think it's also worthwhile to look at an other analogy or some research
that was recently described in a blog post by the CEO of uh well the former CEO of uh github
where they looked at how developers are integrating AI in their workflows and if there's one group of
developers of specialists of technologists that are adopting AI very fast and that we should
really look very good at how they are doing it is developers and developers are adopting
AI very fast in their way of working and they go through these four phases of being first like
skeptic this is really going to work but then trying to experiment with it likewise as threat
modelers as security specialists you should also try to experiment with this understand how this
technology works what it can do what it cannot do and explore and become better at using these
different tools in these different stages of dyes how can we better become better at diagram
how can we integrate these kind of tools in different stages and then go to these next stages of how
can we make sure that all these moving pieces work together in a way that it makes sense that you
can create these kind of workflows in a way that they support you and they come up to you at a
moment in time that your expertise is needed and in the end that you can oversee this as a as an
overall orchestrator or strategist so that's really where we're going for or where it should be going
for so this is not really what i would call like a skill shift it's really it's a skill shift it's
not about eliminating threat modeling and threat molars it's about becoming better at this and
learning and leveraging this technology it's to not only do this but verify what it's doing to
own the decisions because in the end it needs to be a human decision and also increase our impact
to make sure that we can do better and can do more in terms of what we are best at and help
build in the end more secure products with that i think we have some time for for questions
also one call to action if you want to get access or early access to this threat modeling tool
directory we have a monthly newsletter no spam guaranteed only on threat modeling so if you want
to register for that you're free it's you can also find it on our website or if you trust our QR code
scan scan the QR code
and the house from your end i think we're good to get some questions from the audience all right
yes um are there any questions
very very light i think my question
we hear you but the mic does not we'll get a little bit closer
okay um you're running to patients or like
right no but you can hear me no yeah um wait can we can we do either microphone or no microphone
because the the mix of the boat is driving me completely nuts just without the microphone i'll
come a little bit closer
a context window overflow is definitely a thing um so this yeah this is something that you always
have as a limitation models are getting better at it but especially if you start running stuff
locally you're at some point going to uh lose uh context out there that's indeed a big limitation
that consumer grade hardware is simply not going to be doing so you're not really running into a
problem of i don't have enough parameters because oftentimes big i not oftentimes you're going to see
even a degradation and quality if you use more parameters in a model so there's there's a sweet
spot a model size definitely but context window is is absolutely a thing yeah i have to say so that
but the evolving way of the models that this is going to be a limit that's going to be
further and further down the line even now with opus 4.5 um what what i've heard from it that we
have not tested it yet but it it really is better at managing it cause this context window and
even to come it's going to compress earlier input in a way that's still usable to try to come up
with an answer in within the limitations of context window any other questions
still have three minutes yes
so the question is how do we how identify hallucination while while it's not really like
obvious one um by validating by validating really what comes out of it i think it's going to be
harder and harder in a way that obviously what comes out of most of these technologies
are one very convincing so the the human in the loop and the verification is going to be
important but what we see is that also the hallucination factor is going to be less and less
while we instrument and prompt better at keeping it to within the guardrails of doing its job
in a way that that it's uh you you make sure that it's referencing the specific artifacts that were
proof for their findings so by prompting it better by using better LLMs but also in the end
validating the output and that's very certainly for the next couple of months and years a human
in the loop is going to be still very important um especially also where are you going to make a
differentiation between what's a very high-risk versus medium and low-risk findings
one i do things that i also find there is that the problem of hallucinations is not a typical LLM
problem you also have human professionals who don't know what they're talking about so that's
that's a problem that wasn't really introduced by using LLMs secondly a recursive prompting helps
so writing a prompt that keeps on asking questions uh to clarify rather than come up with something
and fine-tuning models also really helps sharpen it down but the risk of overfitting your
model is very very present if you don't have enough training high quality training examples
but uh indeed the rest risk is still a human who was uh talking out of their neck 20 years ago or
an LLM that's talking out of its neck today that's still the same problem so i don't really think
we're going to be uh solving that so that's just a shift in my opinion okay we still have time for
one more question or will we uh me too
so can i uh understand the questions are there um traveling examples available where we can train
on yeah yeah so there's definitely some initiatives that there were some older initiatives a track
on cookbook within oh i suppose an older one but there is a couple of new projects i don't remember
the name here and we should probably have involved it but there were a couple of people that are
building lists of trap models and trap modeling directories where indeed we can train our models
to become better at doing trap modeling because for instance just working on the generated trap
models from the Microsoft trap modeling tool it's probably like i also i also see that being a
problematic to start training on that data because making a threat model for a medical device company
or making a threat model for a bank or two completely different things you're talking about human
safety in one aspect and you're talking about financial loss in the other one so if you're doomsday
scenarios that your threat modeling towards are wildly different having those two as two equivalent
training inputs i don't really see that working so if we could come to a high volume of high quality
threat models for a specific industry then i could see that approach working otherwise it's
going to be so vague that you're just uh running into the problem of blended whiskey there's some
really bad whiskey in there and a few good ones and then on average you have something that's
drinkable but that's that's the that's the gist am i opinion okay all right and i think we are
on time yes thank you again good thank you all us germany you are great thanks
