API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93604
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/god2025-56488-i-have-no-idea-how-to-make
Title: "I have no idea how to make it safer": Security and Privacy Mindsets of Browser Extension Developers

>> Thank you very much for the long introduction, and welcome. I'm going to talk about browser
extensions. So before I begin, I just wanted to understand my audience. How many of you
actually use browser extensions on a daily basis? Okay, quite many. Maybe a less popular
>> I'm going to talk about the first part of the talk. I'm going to emphasize on the fact that this is not a developer bashing talk. This is a developer helping talk.
self-bosting slide could help. So yes, I do academic research. I'm doing post-doc at MPISP.
Security and privacy, yes. And I like to do web application security, but now I'm also interested
in other things like, you know, talking to people, as I'm doing here, talking to people about what
sort of security and privacy practices that they do and sort of harms that security and privacy
issues couldn't go. But that's about me. Yes, since I already asked, I'm assuming that you might
be familiar with at least one of these extensions that probably you used at some point of your time
on web. Yes, this was just to bring some familiarity. Now, why do we care about browser extensions?
Yes, we use them, but why is it so interesting for security and privacy?
Just looking at it from like perspective of recent things that happened with browser extension,
it seems like it may not be interesting for the community like who's developing them,
but it's definitely interesting for attackers in the wild. They've been trying to exploit this
because, well, extensions are frivolous. They could do a lot more damage than in native web
applications. And that's kind of scary of it. Talking from the resource perspective, what do we
know about them? Well, there are a lot more things, but to take a step back and think on high level,
what sort of things could go wrong with browser extensions? It's very much similar to what you
have seen in the web. You see cross-site scripting, extensions could have that too, unfortunately.
And then same goes for fingerprinting and then information leaks. And some of our previous works
also tell us that extensions could modify headers to allow JavaScript execution and other functionality
that they desire. Unfortunately, unfortunately, these are not malicious extensions. They just want
to execute desired functionality, but we call them benign, but buggy because they could still
incur these damages that we have, like, for example, cross-site scripting. So the highlight of this,
the rest of the talk is going to be benign, but buggy extensions. We know for a fact that, okay,
there are some problems that exist. What do we do about it? We asked ourselves, when a developer,
a person who wants to write an extension for themselves or for their friends,
do that. What sort of security and privacy decisions do they take? Or what is the security
privacy mindset to a level of abstraction? And then we talked to these people.
In essence, we talked to 21 of these extension developers, spanning across reasons, countries,
even continents. I guess the number was, like, all of them had cumulative user count of 6 million,
so they were also, like, very popular extensions. With them, what we talked about is, like, okay,
what is your experience? What have you done so far? What sort of technical and professional
background and blah, blah, blah, that happened? But more importantly, we also asked them to
kind of work on some of the tasks that we had curated to understand what exactly goes into
practice, rather than what they talk about. Like, okay, what are the security and privacy
decisions do they take when they have to implement a bit of a piece of code or, you know, a task?
And then we try to understand, like, the overall mindset through this. And, well, yes, we don't,
we did not want to understand, like, how they arrived to this, what exactly the solution would
be, but rather the solution strategy in terms of security and privacy. But that's pretty much
about the research side of things that I'm going to talk about. Now, I'm going to talk about the
results. Before that, yes, I forgot. So this used to be the case, like, pre-LLM era, where,
you know, these used to be the information sources or ground truth for developer development purposes,
but now we also have these, which we actually allowed developers to consult when they were
actually coding because that's the game, right? That's the ground truth. We don't learn code by
heart. We consult sources and then we write code. And we try to be as real-world as possible when
we were trying to understand or gauge their mindset in sort of sense. So we had two tasks here,
and that's what we're going to talk about. One was kind of privacy-aware task, and then the other
one was security-aware task. Talking about the privacy-aware task, we built a website,
like a mock website or mock task as well. We just asked developers that, hey, here be the webpage,
which asks you for an address. Can you write an extension, not from the scratch? Can you fill
the stopcode here, which kind of saves your address and also auto-fills whenever you come back to,
you know, buy another product from the same website? Pretty simple, pretty straightforward.
We gave them all the information as such, and then we asked them to just fill this stopcode,
like how they would go about storing semi-sensitive privacy-aware data in this situation. That was
essentially the goal. Interestingly, we found actions which were differing, of course,
but I think the underlying reasons were quite interesting rather than just the results.
I'm not sure how many of you are familiar with the local stories or the web stories API,
how it functions on the web, and then for extension side of things, there's also a dedicated API,
which is chrome.stories API, which we had seen in our previous research that local stories
API or any web stories API for that matter be it's session stories or index DB, in fact,
can be used to fingerprint extensions on the client side. So this was basically the premise
to understand, okay, what and why do extension developers choose what they do?
And surprisingly or unsurprisingly, most developers actually chose local stories because
it's convenient. The documentation helps, and well, not many people are aware of the differences
that may exist between, you know, the web stories API and why there is like a dedicated browser.stories,
the Mozilla world or chrome.stories in the chrome world that there exists. So what I'm trying to hint
with this whole experiment or the task is, well, there are APIs, there are multiple APIs to enable
certain same functionalities, but then of course, the overall goal could be different there.
But this definitely is not clear to most developers that we interacted with.
And I'm just talking to terms of the 21 developers that we talked to.
So yeah, the security and privacy benefits are unclear, is what we kind of understood from this
experiment. What do, of course, these developers consulted the documentation, even charge GPT or
another code assistant and such. So what do the documentation has to say about this?
Actually, we looked at Mozilla, we looked at Chrome because, well, browser extensions,
these are the two most popular information sources. Surprisingly, again, or unsurprisingly,
the documents are not explicitly specific about what sort of S&P games or losses do you incur
when you choose one over the other. And that, in our opinion, is a bit problematic.
And that's what, when we talk to developers about, like, okay, now when you see this and this,
like, how do you decide this? Well, the response was, this is pretty vague and ambiguous. It doesn't
really help us decide what is even security and privacy problem here. Whatever works for us works.
Unfortunately, that was the case. I talked about AI assistance and, yes, many developers actually
use them. So we could also gaze, like, okay, how do they integrate, you know, the LLM bits and
pieces nowadays or AI bits and pieces. So I have this because, like, I just wanted to show you that
how co-pilot used to work back, you know, even now, is like you prompt something and then based on that,
you get a solution. Or in some other AI assistance, like, Superman, when you write a piece of comment
and then based on that comment, you get the solution. What I'm trying to say with this is,
like, AI assistance in practice could be only as smart as the seed that you give them or, you know,
the developer themselves. To set more light on this, we have an example. So if you look at it,
the gray side of the code was something that was generated by co-pilot because the seed here,
local storage was given by the developer themselves. Which was different from one particular case
that we observed. This was supermanvin, by the way. The AI assistant by itself generated the whole
piece of code without giving any seed. But I don't know. Maybe it's just the AI assistance-based
difference or they maybe extract all the context like where this code is going to execute and what
not. But in essence, the seed could very well determine where the solution would end. And that's
what we kind of observed at scale in our experiments. And now talking about the second task, which was
more like about security mindset or like how do people think of problems which could have
security repercussions. We went back to our experiment or our previous work on header
modifications and we designed our experiment similarly. So we asked developers that, hey,
here be our website and we want to embed Amazon in an iframe. How do you do that?
For example, we had a mock bookstore and we asked like, okay, compare prices with Amazon.
How it would look like ideally is that the iframe is embedded. But Amazon actually includes
x-frame options header by the way to give you some context. If you're not aware of what x-frame
options is, it basically disallows framing based on the policy that is set. And in this case,
it's same origin which essentially tells that, okay, Amazon.com or Amazon.de cannot be iframed
across origins. So this was basically the nickel here and we wanted developers to look at this
and try and understand or give us some insight how they would tackle this problem.
Actually, we saw differing results from the first task.
A lot of people could solve the task somehow towards the end, but they were like, yeah, okay,
this does not seem to be a perfect solution. Yeah, we are not really sure how to get through
this in a more secure manner. And then there were a lot of people who also mentioned that, yeah,
okay, this sounds hacky. I am doing this here, but I actually won't do in my extension.
And then, yeah, some people were just like, yeah, okay, scratch that. I'm not going to do it.
I would think of better alternatives like, yeah, why the hell do I need an iframe?
I can just open in a new tab and that should work. This does not look like a use case.
But again, to emphasize that we were not actually after the solution, we were actually after the
solution strategy, like what sort of mindset that people have. And in essence, it's actually
much better than what we thought of initially that okay, probably developers might not be
wary of security issues, which was not really the case when it comes to overly security
critical implications, developers were actually on the game. So yeah, that was about the iframe
side of things. But then again, because this was more difficult than the first task, people
heavily used LLMs for this. And interestingly, we observed a pattern which might be
relatable to you guys as well. I'm not really sure. So if you look at the highlighted part,
there are some security reasons or suggestions or legal suggestions that have been given by
the charge GPT here at least. What we observed in general was when there are these strong
suggestions given by charge GPT, at least in this case, people were yeah, okay, I trust this
whatever that charge GPT has given. And I take this as a strong indicator of correctness. I'm not
going to question what it is. So what I'm trying to say here is people did not really wet what was
given as an output, especially when there were words like security and you should not do something
in terms of like, okay, this could be dangerous and such. And the more interesting thing was,
when people used these like took help, they had to ask like, okay, what do you think about the
solution? And they kept asking the same question three to four times during our interview or during
our discussion. And then eventually, charge GPT came up with, yeah, okay, this could be dangerous,
by the way, which could actually be factually incorrect. If you look at the second example,
which says that security, due to security reasons, Chrome does not allow these extensions.
That's actually factually wrong, because there are many extensions, even newer extension which
could modify headers. It's just that they are processed more rigorously. So it's factually
incorrect. But people take it, take these indicators as terms of correctness. Okay, this was all about
the two experiments that we have had. But we also wanted to understand the overall pattern and
things that we understood during the discussion with these developers. And, well, when we talk
about security and privacy, sometimes it's more often about compliance, because, well,
our product needs to run, our product needs to make money, and that's all that we care for.
Not us personally, but just saying in general. Well, this also comes with extensions, because,
well, B8, Mozilla, or Chrome, they have certain rules for extension developers,
and they have been trying to make this better every day, every week, every month, and so on.
Right? So just going to one of these regulations, which says that, okay,
to any of these browser extensions, they should not have any remote code inclusion.
That means that all the JavaScript that in extension needs to execute should be packaged,
sent to whatever vendor that we're talking about, and they should be vetted.
So that's pretty much the goal here, that every code should be vetted, and there is no remote
code inclusion. Actually, we learned about some of the patterns which could be interesting.
What happens if an extension injects an iFrame into the page, and that iFrame then
injects or kind of tailored its JavaScript execution?
And yes, and this is something that we learned from one of our participants, who was trying to
be perfectly benign, but also heavily modular, which is very, very much needed in software
practices, that, well, I need to be very modular with all kinds of users, all kinds of websites,
but still compliant, because, well, my extension also needs to be hosted.
So the goal itself was just to execute JavaScript in a custom manner to each website with different
JavaScript might be needed, and that pretty much was the goal, and, well, the participant did it
through iFrames. The question is, is it too bad? Well, it's compliant. Chrome knows what they're
doing. Mozilla knows what they're doing, right? Not really sure, because I've been doing security
research for a while now, and I could think of an attack like within a minute, like how this could
heavily go wrong. I could have, I don't know, an iFrame, which is just like even on the same
origin through source doc, and then, you know, just execute JavaScript, contact even third parties,
which won't be seen by Chrome during wedding, and then do the damage. And, well, if you're still
wondering how this whole thing fits in, you have an iFrame, you have PostMessage API, and then you
have, like, the extension-based interaction, and all of this becomes, like, pretty neat bypass,
but also very dangerous for the user, because, well, we don't know what sort of JavaScript would
execute. So this was actually problematic, but in the end, the extensions were still compliant,
and when I was preparing for this talk, I spoke to one of my colleague yesterday,
who was also a researcher, and they said, yeah, actually, we are also doing this. Thank you for
sharing. I like your talk, but I don't like what you suggest. This is a problem. Yeah, compliance
could actually be different from security and privacy. We know that from very, very many domains,
but in this case, well, we saw that here, too. We learned about set modeling of a couple of talks
before, and I just wanted to give you some high-level idea about, like, what browser extension
developers think about them, well, that's what they think about them. Websites cannot do anything
with extension, which is, again, no threats, no problem, is what their mantra was, at least,
that's what prevalent among those 21 developers that we interviewed, which is kind of dangerous,
because I also use at least two to three extensions on a daily basis. I hope they are not, like,
none of these developers are actually thinking in this manner. So, as I said, like, there's been
constant development in terms of security and privacy enforcement. There are isolation boundaries,
but the developers are actually not aware of this. So they think that whatever JavaScript that they need,
whatever sources that they refer to this copy paste things, and that works, and so be it,
we don't really care about how this works underneath, because we don't have to things work, and that's
pretty much it. The problem is, this leads to various threats that I mentioned in the beginning,
like cross-site scripting, fingerprinting, and even information leaks, especially for
password managers and such. That's a bit problematic, yes. Then, talking about what the definition
of security and privacy itself means to people. A lot of people that we talk to, like, actually
confuse what security and privacy could be to trust and safety, because, well, they just want
the users to trust themselves, the users to feel safe, even though the extension might not actually
be safe, but the users should just feel safe, and that's pretty much that they care about,
because, well, user base is important for popularity. Yes. And the other thing was, yes, we need to be
future-proof, so we add as much code as possible. We don't care so much about what the bloat could
do, or what sort of damage it could incur in future. Like, looking at all of this, and trying to
understand why this happens, we realize that, well, these developers are not really, you know,
these extension developers are not developers. They are citizen developers. Or, in the keynote,
we heard about wipe coders. I guess this is still going to go higher, even, because we have LMS now.
They would probably be wipe coders in the coming days. And they don't really understand about
the web development, even. Like, security and privacy is even next level, I would say.
So that's, again, this is problematic. I don't expect everyone who's writing a piece of code to
be security and privacy experts as well. They are already wearing a lot of hats. But, again,
if I'm a standalone extension developer writing a password manager, this could be problematic for
my users. And this is all that I wanted to say with this. And then there were some other
miscellaneous remarks that we captured, saying that, well, when we asked about what privacy policies
and stuff that they consider, well, they said probably none, because it's the responsibility of
the store. And we don't really understand how this works. We try to be as transparent as possible,
but they don't really understand the threat modeling there, or like the third
party scripts that they may include and such. So they just give up at some point,
because it's apparently too hard for them. Yeah. And then one other pattern probably
known to many people, but this was revealing to me that, you know, extensions, there are people
who just want to buy your extension. If you're wondering for how much, this is what an average
number looks like. You still have the control and everything. It's just that they would ask
you to inject one script for analytics purposes and whatnot. And in practice,
we interviewed a person who actually worked in such a company and said, like, no, none of these
vendors can actually detect these scripts. So it was kind of dangerous. And just to give you a
disclaimer, I forgot to write in the slides, we disclosed all of this to all the browser vendors,
like Opera, Mozilla and everything, so that they know what's going on. And then the last good part
that we understood from developers was actually they don't help users in contempt. They don't
really see them being also aware of everything. But then the bigger question is who actually should
be on their toes to make this better? I don't have an answer for this, because I'm towards the
closing of my talk now. Yes, to summarize things. Well, as we saw, the definition of security and
privacy is highly objective to individual developers. And well, in most terms, it looked like they
just want their user base to stick around. And that's all. They call it trust, they call it safety,
they call it sometimes security even, but that's pretty much about it. Yes, set modeling is hard.
And for extension developers who are not actually developers, it's harder. So yeah, it's a bit of
thing. I guess it requires a set of community effort, like all stakeholders coming in to make
this a bit better. Yes, I don't know. We attended a lot of talks this since this morning and learned
a lot about LLMs again, but unsurprisingly, well, LLMs are only as good as people using them is
what my opinion here is. Yes, with the second experiment, the security header dropping experiment,
we saw that many people, you know, ended up doing the right thing, but they have no clue about the
processes. And this could be a dangerous and real world is what we can assume at this point.
Yeah. From the first experiment, there are multiple options. Some of them could even be
deprecated, but then if they are still around and supported by browser for backwards compatibility
and whatnot, but the documentation doesn't really help, it is again problematic. Yeah, lastly.
Yeah. There were instances where we saw that people only wanted to choose a certain solution
because Chrome likes it or Chrome could just erase it at some point of time.
I don't want to do vendor bashing as well, but just just giving you some ideas like,
okay, this could be problematic as well. With that, thank you so much for listening and holding on
after lunch. And I'd be happy to take questions now.
