API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/65950
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/dgna-56069-staatstrojaner-pegasus-und-ns
Title: Staatstrojaner, Pegasus und NSO Group

(speaks in foreign language)
(speaks in foreign language)
Are you ready?
At least some of you.
That's great.
So, are you ready as well, Pocky?
Great.
Good.
Hello.
(speaks in foreign language)
(speaks in foreign)
(speaks in foreign)
(speaks in foreign)
(speaks in foreign)
Security researcher works at Amnesty International Security Lab
and he had large influence to say so
at the project Pegasus.
So, what the project Pegasus is or was?
There is a nice movie.
So, we're going to show you this movie.
So, it makes his and my life easier
instead of giving a life introduction.
So, it's a 10 minutes movie and afterwards,
we're going to discuss about everything
which was not in the movie and, of course,
you're also free to ask questions.
- I will never forget the moment
that I not just saw the data, but understood.
- So, for those who need to subtitle, so.
(upbeat music)
- It was.
(upbeat music)
Once it owns your phone, it owns everything.
- They can access the camera, the microphone.
- The old videos, the old photographs,
they can see what you're writing.
- The GPS location.
- Your emails.
- They can do everything that the user can do and more.
- In July, 2021, an international consortium
of over 80 journalists from 17 news organizations
broke the story of a spyware scandal
that continues to reverberate around the world.
At the center of the scandal was a leaked list
of 50,000 phone numbers.
Reaching into every corner of civil society,
the investigation revealed that the list
included activists, journalists, lawyers,
and political leaders who had been unlawfully targeted
by potential client governments
of Cyber Surveillance Company, NSO Group.
This is the story of how Amnesty International's
security lab played a crucial role
in exposing the forensic evidence
that proved beyond doubt that the data could be connected
to cyber attacks from the military grade spyware system
known as Pegasus.
(eerie music)
- What our team focuses on is investigating
targeted attacks and targeted surveillance
against human rights defenders, civil society,
and journalists around the world.
- The security lab began investigating NSO Group in 2018
when Pegasus was discovered to have been used to target
an Amnesty International staff member.
- If they can target one of the biggest human rights
organizations in the world without accountability,
just think what they think they can do
to other human rights defenders.
And to me, they infuriated me.
- As a result of this attack,
the security lab had the clues they needed
to discover more about NSO Group and its customers.
- They managed to identify approximately 600 domain names
that NSO Group's customers were using
to deliver these kinds of attacks.
We also found a handful of other activists
who had also received similar links at the same time.
On one of these individuals' devices,
we found traces of a new kind of attack.
- It used to be that for Pegasus
to get infected on your phone,
you would need to click on a link.
You know, something related to your work,
here you're really gonna enjoy this.
It was very manipulative.
And then we saw an escalation to what's called the zero click.
- Zero click meant that Pegasus was able to install itself
on a target's phone without any interaction from the user,
making this spyware even more dangerous
and harder to detect.
- You know, there's like some smart technologists
on the other side who spend a lot of time and effort
trying to create these spyware tools,
trying to operate them in a way that isn't tactical.
And so it's definitely an interesting mental battle
to try and understand what they're doing
and to understand what kind of mistakes they might have made.
- Between 2018 and 2020,
the number of Pegasus victims
identified by Amnesty International,
the University of Toronto Citizen Lab
and other partner organizations was continuing to grow.
- Even if you haven't been totally owned
and there's still proof of infection,
the fact that you've even been targeted
can have a major psychological impact.
- They knew everything I said and knew that
it wasn't really intense.
- They are threats.
Of course you have fear.
- To many, the model is wrong.
To exactly change your life, change your life.
- Despite this growing body of evidence
and the damage being inflicted on human rights defenders,
the response to concerns about NSO's activities
had been limited.
- We had been talking about this issue
alongside many other civil society partners
for a really long time.
And we had essentially driven home the point
that this is an industry and this is a company
that by way of transparency,
it provides very little information
and so that adds to the atmosphere of impunity.
- But with the list of 50,000 phone numbers,
this was about to change.
Investigative journalists of Forbidden Stories
were the lead organization on an investigation
that included the Guardian, Lamond and the Washington Post,
with Amnesty International as the technical partner.
- We've put so much effort into building the expertise,
to be able to do this kind of research.
And if it had not been for the most years of work
and years of trying to understand
how we can do human rights,
work a little bit differently in this sphere,
we wouldn't have been as fit for purpose as we were.
- So what was the reaction of the security lab
when they first saw the data?
- Who were those phone numbers?
Who did they belong to?
What did this mean?
I mean, the questions that just started rolling
through my head were epic,
but every time we got even like a little bit of an answer
about what we were looking at,
that feeling of like, this is important,
this is really important.
It just grew and grew and grew.
- It really drove home the fact that this industry
is out of control and that we need to retain it in
because it has massive implications
for human rights worldwide.
- Once the investigations into the list of phone numbers
were underway, it was essential to step up security measures.
- Not only are you working on a very sensitive human rights
project, you're working on a sensitive human rights project,
that concerns one of the largest spyware vendors in the world.
- The more we realized what we were looking at,
the more we realized that states wouldn't want
this information to get out.
That NSO group certainly wouldn't want this information
to get out.
- For all of our meetings, we were making sure
we didn't have our regular mobile phones
to write regular laptops in the same room.
- Then through the course of our investigation,
we actually found out that a couple of the journalists
that we were working with had in fact been targeted.
- As the investigation continued, journalists undertook
the painstaking task of identifying who the phone numbers
belonged to, but how many of these people
had actually been attacked by Pegasus?
- Based on their groundbreaking work,
the Security Lab had the tools to provide the answer.
- We developed some friends with tools
for extracting data from an iPhone.
And so over time, we began to identify more and more
of these unknown suspicious process names,
and we were able to tie these process names
back to the Pegasus spyware itself.
- What that meant is they were actually able to build tools
that we could then use to remotely access backups of phones
and quickly, as quickly as possible, do an assessment
of whether or not there were traces of Pegasus on that phone.
- This was the turning point in the investigation.
By July 2021, of the 67 phones that the Security Lab
had been given access to, 37 showed evidence
of infiltration by Pegasus.
As well as 14 heads of state, the wider investigation
revealed that the phone numbers of at least 180 journalists
in 20 countries were listed in the data.
The Pegasus Project also named the 11 countries
identified as potential NSO group clients.
And Pegasus was found to have been used to target family members
of Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi prior to his murder
by agents of the Saudi state.
The forensic tools developed by the Security Lab
have since been made open source and installed
over 70,000 times, allowing users across the globe
to add to the growing list of confirmed attacks
and shedding new light on the scale of illegal cyber surveillance.
So with all of this knowledge and all of the secrecy,
what was it like when the Pegasus Project
was ready to go public?
- Are people gonna see how important this is?
Not just for civil society and human rights defenders
around the world, but for like all of us.
This is a major privacy issue.
This is something that big tech corporations need to look at,
that journalists need to look at,
that everybody needs to look at.
And is this going to be the moment we hope it is
to be able to pivot towards actual change?
- With repercussions that continue to reverberate
around the world, the revelations of the Pegasus Project
have been explosive.
As a result of the investigation, a number of sort of steps
have been taken in the right direction.
The US government placed NSO group on its entity list
for malicious activity.
Investigations are open in Hungary, Belgium, France.
The Supreme Court of India has set up a technical committee
to look into Pegasus targeting.
There's many more, but I'll stop there.
- Most recently, thanks to the work of Citizen Lab,
Apple has filed a lawsuit against NSO Group
to hold it accountable for the surveillance
and targeting for Apple users.
In the face of these revelations,
NSO has continued to maintain its position,
that it provides authorized governments
with technology that helps them combat terror and crime.
- I'm thrilled to see that the world did take notice, right?
People do realize that this is important.
- I feel like this is now crunch time.
And hence, Amnesty is calling for a moratorium
on the sale, transfer, export and use of spyware,
until a proper human rights regulatory regime is put in place.
- I think people have gotten over a little bit
of this tech apathy that we see all the time.
Tech is too big, it's too scary.
We can't regulate it, it's out of control.
Not true, right?
The stuff is built by humans,
and it can be regulated by humans.
There is no difference.
- There's much more, much more to be done.
Investigations need to be held into providing victims
with the right remedy and perpetrators
behind this should be held to account.
So we need to keep exposing this work.
We need to keep advocating for regulation.
And we need to keep reminding everybody that there is hope.
You know, we can change this system.
Your rights can be protected.
Your phone does not need to be a weapon
against your privacy.
- All right.
- All right.
So a list of 50,000 phone numbers.
So just many digits to start off.
I don't know, maybe that's a bit too much movie-like.
So what I imagine now,
so a day person walks into your office
and says here are 50,000 phone numbers.
So was it like that?
And what went through your mind?
I mean, 50,000 numbers, just a bunch of digits.
What are you going to do with it?
Or did you know that's the thing?
- So I think we definitely had mixed emotions.
'Cause on one side, we knew that we got this list,
and we thought this is an incredible opportunity
to really show the full scale of the problem.
But also, we knew that something concerned about,
okay, this is a huge list.
How do we even begin trying to figure out
what if this data is real?
If it is actually linked to Pegasus,
whether we can prove with friends' evidence
that people can understand
that these hacks really did occur.
And then just the logistics of it.
'Cause I can imagine this was in 2020, 2021
during the middle of the COVID pandemic.
So we couldn't travel anywhere.
We couldn't go physically to go and meet somebody
to get the device to check their phones.
And even if we could,
we needed to do all of this in a global collaboration
without while keeping this whole investigation secret.
So you have, as Donna said, as my colleagues here said,
we have a global scale of the problem.
So we need to try and figure out
how do we go and meet people, get this evidence,
while keeping the whole investigation secret
and not exposing it to NSO group
or any of the government customers who used to spyware
that we were investigating them.
If we had any leak about this investigation
before we were ready to publish,
you could have sabotaged and blocked the whole project.
So I think this was, yeah, just the scale was just phenomenal.
But on the other hand, it was just such a relief
because before this, we were painstakingly trying to find
one case here, one case there, yeah.
- So finally, you had a list of,
a long list of potential victims.
Is there a new word to search for?
- Exactly, so I can go back a little bit
to show how it was different from how we were working previously.
So we first started working on spyware and surveillance
at Amnesty in 2017.
So most people know Amnesty as a human rights organization
doing campaigning, advocacy work.
And so I think a lot of people we talk to are a bit surprised
that Amnesty has technologists and has people doing
kind of deep technical research.
But I think at least some people at Amnesty realized
was that technology is increasingly part of our lives
and it's also a major human rights risk
because states have realized they can use technology
and technological tools to try and control
and intimidate human rights offenders
and journalists and activists
and to try and challenge this technological human rights
abuses we need to have technologies at Amnesty
who can really research and document this.
We first started working on Pegasus in 2018
when one of our own Amnesty colleagues
was themselves targeted.
And so it kind of fell into our lap.
As you say, this person was working
on issues related to Saudi Arabia
and when they got a message on WhatsApp saying,
hi, I'm an activist from Saudi Arabia.
We're organizing a protest at Saudi Embassy in DC.
Please click this link for more information
and help promote our cause.
Fortunately, this activist is quite cautious.
So maybe paranoid and she shared this link to it with us
instead of clicking on it.
And when we got this link, we started kind of digging into it
and that was maybe our first lead
to start getting into this whole topic
and especially on NSO.
- So you were all right.
Actually already about two years on the Pegasus thing
to say so when the list showed up.
- Yeah, exactly.
So when we first started working on NSO,
we published a report about our Amnesty colleague
being targeted and we kind of put the detail
technical evidence showing how it was linked to NSO.
But we knew that there wasn't enough
so we can continue our work.
We continue trying to track this company
and trying to find more evidence of these abuses.
So the next time we found a case of this was in Morocco.
So we had suspicions that Morocco was using Pegasus,
spyware to target human rights offenders.
We know they'd used spyware in the past.
And so we kind of did a more painstaking approach.
We looked at the situation in Morocco,
we're like, okay, who are the 10 most targeted activists
or targeted journalists who are being most harassed
by the state, maybe who are being jailed,
otherwise intimidated.
And then we just started reaching out to people
to our Amnesty contacts.
We said, okay, you're activists here.
You might be under surveillance
and we did some forensics.
We checked their devices and from this
we were able to find some of the first cases
of Pegasus surveillance with this forensic proof.
And what was really disappointing though at the time
was we found this evidence and we published it.
And unfortunately, basically nobody cared.
We tried to talk to media,
trying to say this is a problem that's happening.
No media is really ancient and covering it.
They were like, this is a two technical issue
or it affects people in Morocco or Azerbaijan
who is not an interesting story for them.
And so I think we were at this time really frustrated
'cause we started to realize how big of a problem
this was becoming and that so many more countries
could buy these really sophisticated tools to hack any phone
and basically nobody knew about it.
And even when we tried to find some proof of it,
it still was being kind of ignored or disregarded.
- So from that perspective,
once you had the 50,000 phone number list,
things became big.
So are you happy with the response you got?
Or we have expected or hope even for more?
- No, I definitely think it's really the response
we've seen and the impact it's had
has been far greater than we could have imagined.
And what we've learned since about the scale of the problem
is also really, yeah, I think shocked us.
And also we're starting to see some movement
to have a proper regulation about this software.
- Yeah, so when we first started working on Pegasus,
I think we started seeing who were being targeted here.
We knew it was probably going to be journalists,
activists, the type of people we work with.
But none of it is really expected
when we started getting to the list
just the scale of the targeting.
So we're seeing 50,000 people.
And when we started looking at the list,
it wasn't just a few journalists,
it was hundreds of journalists.
We see opposition politicians being targeted in Hungary,
in Poland, we see some really heartbreaking stories,
like the case of Khadija Ismalova,
who is an Azerbaijanian journalist
who's been working for years to expose corruption
under the ideology of Aliyah regime in Azerbaijan.
And so it wasn't the first time
that she'd been put under surveillance.
We've seen previously that state like Azerbaijan
has been using kind of more low tech tactics.
In 2012, she was working on a corruption investigation
into the Aliyah regime.
And at the time, she, one day, got an envelope in the mail
with intimate photos of her with her partner.
And they basically threatened her
with these surveillance photos that had up her
from her hidden camera in her apartment,
saying, "If you don't stop your investigations,
we'll expose these."
Or she's a very brave journalist.
She had a press conference and told
what kind of intimidation the state was trying to do
and kind of preempted this.
And they still try to leak her sense of photos
to try and intimidate her.
And so, when we look at, this is one tactic
that a state like Azerbaijan has used.
And what we're seeing recently
is we're just happening more and more around the world.
So people are using these kinds of surveillance tools,
not just to collect information,
but also as tools to try and get ways
of blackmailing people, intimidating people,
to use information that's stolen from people's phones
to leak information to pro-state media
that tries to defame people
and damage the reputation
and also to organize,
trumped up charges against people to try
and really describe their work and activism.
So we see this not just a privacy issue,
but it's a massive issue on freedom of expression
and it creates such a chilling effect
that people cannot organize freely
and communicate with each other.
Well, potentially everyone can be a victim.
So we all don't know,
except we're running your software.
But yeah, we don't know what's on our phone.
So as far as I understand,
so Pegasus doesn't leave any traces
for ordinary people on their phones.
So it's hidden, right?
Or is there any chance for a person like everyone here
including me, or if I was our potentially nerd somewhere,
would we realize if we have Pegasus on our phones?
- So I think the really scary thing about Pegasus
is that it's very, very difficult
to find the traces and to notice it.
I think when most people think about hacking
or government hacking, they might imagine
somebody sending you a phishing email,
trying to get your passwords
or maybe sending you an executable file
and trying to get you to open this.
And this is something we've seen in the past
from governments who've kind of developed
the software themselves.
What's really scary about Pegasus
is that they're obviously a very sophisticated company.
They have millions and millions per year
that they can spend on research and development
to buy some of the most sophisticated exploits
and ways of breaking into basically any iPhone
and the Android phone in the world.
We've also, we've had some more scary recently
as we've seen them changing their tactics.
Before we see them what's doing,
what's called a one-click attack.
And so one-click attack is where,
like what happened with my amnesty colleague.
- Link, then you need to click the link.
- Yes, exactly, send your link and you click the link.
It's still very easy, it's still very effective
because it's not like you need to install anything.
You just click the link and just by opening that link,
they'll start running some sophisticated browser exploit
in your phone.
They can get access to the browser
and eventually burrow deeply in the phone.
Once the spyware is there,
it can basically access anything the user can do.
And even more, it can read your signal messages,
it can turn on your microphone, it can turn on your camera,
it can copy everything it possibly wants from your phone.
And unfortunately, it's nothing you see on the phone
that will let you notice is happening.
It won't necessarily have your battery draining,
it won't make your phone slow,
it'll just really silently be able to remove this data.
And so that's what we saw up until 2018 or 19.
So we're seeing these kind of one-click attacks.
In some ways, they were hard to detect,
but there was still a chance
because like with our colleague,
someone would see this link
and especially if they know they're being under surveillance
or otherwise being threatened,
there is some chance that they will notice this
and come to somebody like a recent stream
like us at Amnesty or other partner organizations
and we can dig into this.
I think what really drastically changed
our understanding of the problems
when we realized that NSO was also doing
what's called a zero-click attack.
So with a zero-click attack,
they have a complex way of breaking into a phone
without the user having to do anything at all.
So without having to click a link,
without something else or silently,
you can be in bed at night
just by sending them sending messages to your phone,
they can break into the phone and get access to your data.
We've seen doing this in multiple different ways.
The first time we discovered this was in 2019
where WhatsApp found that the NSO group
had developed an exploit against WhatsApp
and in just a two-week period,
this was used to target 1,400 phones around the world
completely silently
and we only discovered this on WhatsApp,
found the exploit and found the attack
and then what was quite helpful in this case
was WhatsApp also, a few months later,
they began notifying the people that they had discovered
who had been impacted by this attack.
- And so the people wouldn't know
because there would be a WhatsApp message
which is, I don't know, not displayed
or once the pegs of software is installed,
they can manipulate the phone,
it can remove its own message
or yeah, so that would be really no trace.
- Exactly, so in that case,
there was no trace visible for the user.
They would simply get a missed video call
and just in the initial process of trying to make the video call,
they would be able to deliver their spyware
into the device itself.
So I think that what that made us realize
is that we as Amnesty
and we as people who were trying to tackle this problem,
we couldn't kind of wait for people to come to us
with suspicions and with worries about links
or attachments of this kind of thing.
And we realized we had to somehow try to be proactive
in going to discover this thing in the world
and we also needed to start developing some tools
and forensic abilities so that we could check a phone
that we suspect may be as targeted,
extract all the data from the phone
and try to find some ways of identifying
and tracking the spyware that tries very hard
not to be identified.
- So you said, or let me start the other way around,
so is there, I don't know, some email or contact?
You want to publish so if someone is,
or has to feel in his or her phone is threatened
or what would you suggest people to do that?
- You know, definitely if you're a journalist or activist
and you have reasons to be suspicious
that your phone might be targeted,
we do have a kind of helpline at our Amnesty Security Lab
to help support people in checking their devices.
And then also we as Amnesty, we believe that there is,
there shouldn't be knowledge that's just kept
for a small group of people,
but what we've done that's quite different
is when we, through the package project
and our other investigations,
we develop this capability to detect spyware
that really no one else had done before.
We thought it was extremely important
to publish this openly so that other people
can use these tools and can also check their own devices
and help discover other cases
that maybe we want to discover ourselves.
And actually that's proved very successful
and since the package project was released,
we've seen new cases all around the world
being discovered using MVT in some of these tools
that have developed by panel organizations
in El Salvador, in Poland, in Thailand.
Now we've seen new cases in Greece
where many people in the opposition and journalists
have been attacked with another spyware tool.
- Another one.
- Yeah.
- It never stops.
So that means also you probably,
so the Pegasus case did not,
it's maybe less now in media
because probably it was 21 and now other things are happening.
So for ordinary people it's gone,
but I assume for you it's still in that case the long going
because well, I think you also released the tool,
maybe you can say something about that as well,
but that means an Instagram group knows
how you know if phones are infected or not.
So I would assume that they try to go further
and find new ways to cover again.
So that means also you would need to update your tools.
- Yeah, exactly.
It's always like an arms race in this situation
because we try and identify who's being
kind of unlawfully surveilled and targeted with this software.
And unfortunately NSO group tries to keep making money
by selling this to states.
And right now most of the customers who are still customers
seem to be, yeah,
states you can imagine who will abuse it.
Like you've seen the UAE, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Salvador.
And so we're always trying to make sure
that we're still having some ability to detect these cases.
We have seen a lot of changes in the situation
since the Pegasus project.
Back in 2021, we were doing these forensic investigations
where they see no leads to the Pegasus data.
But one thing that's been a real help to our research
and also to other civil society researchers
is that in 2021 after the Pegasus project,
Apple decided to really try to also tackle this problem
they saw that it's not only bad for their users,
but it's also bad for their business
if their phones are being tagged all the time.
And so what they've done is they've also followed the lawsuit
against NSO group in the court in the US,
which has been a really promising development.
They also have a lot more money to hire good lawyers
than Amnesty might do to keep them,
to challenge them.
But I think what's besides the lawsuit,
what's been super powerful and beneficial
is they've also started doing notifications.
So when they identified that somebody
has potentially been targeted with the spyware,
they also now send a notification to the target
saying we suspect you might have been targeted
by some sophisticated spyware.
And that's been super helpful for us for our investigations
'cause people are getting these notifications
and then they're coming to groups like us,
other groups like Citizen Lab,
and we can then do the forensic analysis of their device.
We can understand, okay, I already been targeted recently,
we're trying to find a proof of this
and then we can support them to take different kind of action
either to promote their case.
We've also been providing technical evidence
to let people take legal actions in their country.
So since then, we've seen in the last year or two,
more and more cases coming forward in Mexico,
like in El Salvador, Kazakhstan,
where people are getting these notifications
and then can actually try to seek accountability
for the harms that they're experiencing,
basically in secret without their knowledge.
- So we are mentioning the low case.
Started by Apple, do you know,
if something moved already and do you know what?
So I hear that they did it, but I lost the trace
if already some judgment were made or not, you know?
- So with the Apple case, it's still progressing quite slowly.
As I mentioned earlier,
and so also targeted WhatsApp users
and there wasn't a lawsuit filed in the US by WhatsApp
back in 2019.
So that's been also progressing very slowly.
NSO has used lots of legal arguments to try and appeal
to say that this action should not be taken against them.
They've even taken it to the US Supreme Court
to try and say that they have sovereign immunity,
but they can't be sued because they were for governments
and the governments are not suitable in the US court.
And so this is quite a fire-fetched argument
and thankfully the US government
and the US court system has kind of turned this down.
And so now it's going to go back to the regular court
to hopefully get to start having disclosure from the company
and we'll see some progress around that
to try and get some accountability.
'Cause unfortunately there's been many lawsuits.
Fortunately there's been many lawsuits
around the world since the package project,
but unfortunately for many people,
they're taking legal action against their own government,
whether in Hungary, in India,
where they control the court system
and there hasn't been,
there's been far too little accountability
and justice for the victims,
but I do hope that in some level
with the new Apple and WhatsApp court cases,
they can maybe get some disclosure
and if we don't get accountability for the victims,
at least we'll get some more information
about the practice of the company
and how they've been operating
and using these tools in a way
that's completely incompatible with the human rights.
And do you know if something on the level of actual law,
making change, so has there been any country
who stepped up and said oh, now we see
that this kind of software can also do very harmful,
so we are going to forbid it in our country.
I mean, the most countries say well,
other countries are doing harmful stuff,
but not ours, right?
Is one country clever or honest enough to say,
no, we are not doing that
and we're forbidding that in our territory
or I don't know if what possibilities would be.
- So unfortunately--
- Yes, would be very surprising.
- Unfortunately, I don't think we've seen any country
that's all in our call for a ban on spyware,
but we have seen a lot of actually quite promising progress
on regulation and legislation in different countries.
Probably the first country
that actually took meaningful action against NSO
was the US government.
Again, about two years ago,
they put NSO on their entity list,
which basically bans any US company or person
from working or doing business with NSO
without a very restrictive license.
And while it's by itself doesn't put the company
under business, it shows a very powerful signal
to NSO Group and the other spyware companies
that it's not a legitimate business.
It's not, they like to think of themselves
as a tech startup and they're just building technology tools.
But in this show, the US government is seeing them
as illegitimate in some of the way they've been operating
and the country they've sold it to are really illegitimate.
So that's been a promising sign
and then what's been most promising in Europe
is the establishment of a committee of inquiry
in the European Parliament.
This has been going since early last year.
It's quite an intensive process
where they've been having 30 or 40 MEPs
and they've been really trying to investigate
and getting to the bottom of this scandal.
So they've invited people from NSO,
they've invited money experts, speakers.
They've also gone now on visits to various countries
where in Europe, which have abused these tools,
including Greece, Poland, Hungary,
and now this week they will go to Spain
where Pegasus have been abused very widely
against Catalan activists and civil society.
I think what's interesting is in,
we see quite an ironic situation in Spain
where Spain has been using tools like Pegasus
for many years to target political opposition.
But then we saw last year
that actually the Spanish government themselves
have come out and said that the Spanish Prime Minister
was also hacked with Pegasus.
So it's like what goes around comes around
and it's in a very strange scenario with these kinds of tools
where not only are governments using it
and then getting hacked by also by spyware,
sometimes the governments are getting hacked
by the very same tools they were using.
In that case, media reports say it was likely Morocco
who was trying to spy on the Spanish Prime Minister
and so there's a whole kinds of geopolitical
and other kind of national security risks
that unfortunately are probably more convincing
to a lot of these states to start
putting in better regulation
on the sale of use and transfer of these
than when we show evidence that a journalist
or an activist is being targeted.
And so we have seen, so Amnesty's main policy call
is for having a global moratorium
on the sale of use and transfer of spyware
and other kinds of surveillance technologies
until there's a human rights compliant regulatory framework
in place and so basically,
that means we think this problem has gone too far
that the existing rules in place
are not sufficient to stop the harm
and we'd like to, all the governments to stop
using and exporting these tools
until we put better controls in this.
To have one good story,
I think we have seen that more states
and more at least politicians in the European Union
are supporting this moratorium call
and really a lot of people are,
I tend to realize why this is needed.
We've also seen that the government of Costa Rica
has agreed to support the moratorium.
So there is at least one country
who's supporting standing on.
- Well, for maybe not so much supporting countries,
they usually claim they use it only for the bad guys.
So for the terrorists, it's definitely not for activists, right?
And so groups are the same, right?
We're selling it only to the good states,
to prevent harm from terrorism and so on.
So from a NSO perspective,
I'm kind of playing there, that is adequate.
Is it technically possible for them?
Or is it like, well, here is the tool
and then whatever the buyer does with it, is it?
Or is it like, well, it's more like a service?
So please, NSO, so rate is this this person?
So in the service situation,
so NSO would actually have the possibility,
not saying they do it,
but they would have the possibility
to select which people are surveyed and which not
and they could make a claim or that's a journalist.
So is it possible or is it just some advertising?
- Why do I share your dream?
- It's a good question and it seems like NSO
can never really get their stories straight.
Sometimes they're like, when there's abuse, they say,
okay, give us the name of the person or the phone number,
we'll investigate this and if there's abuse,
we can check it and if we find it's true,
we'll cut the customer off and then at other times,
we say, okay, here's all these abuses,
these countries have been doing for years
and they're like, oh, we don't know,
we couldn't possibly know who the customer is targeting,
it's a separate system we don't have access to.
And so, I think they build a system,
they control the system,
they know who the customers are,
they know they're certain the customers
like Saudi Arabia or the UAE have a long line,
a long history of human rights abuses,
not just in general, but also specifically
with spyware tools and not just with NSO,
but also previously with finfisher, with hacking teams,
some companies who have gone before this.
And we see them just constantly making decisions
where they are continuing to sell the products
to provide services to customers who have abused them.
I think probably the most heartbreaking cases
is with Saudi Arabia.
So again, this is, we already showed evidence in 2018
where it was being used by an embassy staff member
and another Saudi human rights activist.
Instead of cutting off Saudi Arabia from using Pegasus,
they continued having them as a customer.
And later during the Pegasus project,
we found that a partner of Jamal Khashoggi's wife
was targeted with Pegasus in the months
before his investigation,
likely to collect information about him, about his family.
And then even just three days after the murder,
Saudi Arabia targeted his fiancee
when she was in the most vulnerable time in her life
and the target of her and prosecutors and everyone around
the family trying to cover up their own crimes
of murdering this journalist.
And even then NSO did not cut off the customer.
So it's like with having these outrageous abuses
and yet they are somehow valuing either the profit
over the victims or else also we see in a lot of cases,
there is strategic interest in why NSO and Israel allowed
a lot of these companies to sell to Morocco or Bahrain
or Saudi Arabia when we see later,
it leads to normalization and other kinds of intelligence
and security sharing at the expense of the victims.
- Well, this was anyway something which I found strange
or I'm not sure if Israel as a country
is able to control it or not,
but I mean, so Israel is not known to have,
especially in the Arabic world,
every country as a friend.
And how would it be then possible
or that even these countries are using NSO groups tools?
So in the end, Israel doesn't care
or does NSO find a way around that
and even may do a harm against their own country
to say so on a higher level?
So sell it to the country's enemy for the business.
- So I think with NSO at least from all of what we've seen,
NSO was not acting rogue as a company,
they were very much working with the cooperation
and with the support of the Israeli state.
NSO spyware is treated like a weapon in Israel,
so it requires a license to the Ministry of Defense
before it can be exported to any other country.
And so as far as we know, what NSO claims at least
is that every sale of NSO spyware
and every export to any country who is a customer
has all been approved by the Ministry of Defense,
which supposedly has human rights, safeguards in place
and will take into account their record
and the risk of misuse.
In fact, as we see from the hundreds
and journalists and activists here being targeted,
that this is not very much not being effective.
And so in 2020, Amnesty actually filed a lawsuit
in the Administrative Court in Israel
to a request that the Israeli Ministry of Defense
would revoke NSO's export license
basically because we'd shown that it wasn't
sufficient safeguards to prevent the abuses.
Unfortunately, after a few months,
the court came back and said they,
first they sealed the complaint.
So all of the evidence was held in secret,
which we didn't get access to.
And then they said, okay, we've talked to the Ministry
of Defense, we've talked to the company,
they've assured us that everything is above board,
perfectly in order, no violations here.
Not to see here, move along.
It was quite surprising to see a year later
after the Pegasus Project, they kind of changed their tune
and it came out with their hands up being like,
okay, we know mistakes we've made,
all these abuses we didn't know about it,
we couldn't possibly even know about it.
I think, and then they, at that point,
they revoked some of the export licenses
and they limited how many countries
that NSO and similar companies could export spyware to
without a kind of further approval process.
So that was quite helpful
and it was probably also due
to the political pressure they were getting from the US
and from France, where they were,
these states were themselves, I guess,
quite angry and quite worried
that now there are some of their diplomats
or politicians were being targeted with these tools.
- All right, if I may,
I would get back to a bit of kind of a more personal thing
if I can, so you said,
and I mean, it was already clear,
when the list of 50,000 numbers showed up
and it even said in the video,
so it was kind of clear, it became a big thing
in the video, I think, it said,
you did not bring anymore your phone to the meetings.
I don't know, I,
latest at that moment, it sounded also a bit scary
to where such a project.
So how was it for you?
So was it like, ah, now I'm going every day to work
and I'm turning on my computer
and playing my games or was it at some point
and really like, ah, now I need to be very careful
and check my phone twice, put it somewhere else
and all that, so did it,
did it had some impact on you or on your life,
so did you feel still comfortable or, yeah, I don't know.
So, yeah, definitely it had a very big impact
and stress during the project.
So I'm very mindful that I'm living in Berlin,
I'm quite privileged and disconnected
from a lot of the situations
that some of the people we're working with are based in,
so I really feel for some of the journalism activists
in Morocco, Azerbaijan, who really have
a real physical danger and I personally didn't feel
that so much with this project,
but I think we definitely had a big sense of responsibility
for all the people who had been targeted with this spyware
to be able to make sure that we did this investigation,
could show the problem and did it in a way that was safe
and didn't put anybody at risk
and so we really put a lot of thought into how we do this
securely, tangentially without exposing anyone,
so in terms of practical steps,
there was a lot of inconvenient technical things
we needed to do, I remember at one point
having tree-driven phones, tree laptops,
and we'd have a regular phone,
then we'd have a separate device and a laptop
that would be fully compartmentalized,
so it would have an anonymous username, anonymous accounts,
and so the idea was even if somebody figured out
about the project and knew we were investigating it
and to try to hack our phones or hack our computers,
the ideas they'd never get to understand the full scope
of the project 'cause it wouldn't get access to this
separate device, I think that was quite fortunate
'cause in the end we realized that some of the journalists
we were working with in India had actually been hacked
during the investigation, so it wasn't paranoid thinking,
it was people actively being surveilled.
I think it was quite interesting
because we also managed to work with some journalists
who had themselves been victims of spyware,
I think of one particular case of some journalists in Hungary
where we started looking through the list,
we started to try and identify the names,
and then we see journalists that actually
some of the people in the project
recognized and knew I'd worked with in the past,
and so who better to get to investigate spyware
than somebody who themselves have been victimized
and have a personal interest in doing this,
so I remember at the time, again, during COVID,
one of the journalists from the Subditch's Lautengen
flew to Hungary, to Budapest to meet with this journalist
Shahbox, and they're like, okay, we need to talk to you,
and they had some pretense in that, okay,
but you need to leave your phone here,
and the journalist is quite...
- Yeah, can anybody worry what's going on here?
And so then when they left the room from his phone,
they were like explaining, okay,
so we have a, we have a species that your phone
might be under surveillance and spyware,
and we have this team of Amnesty who helped check your phone
if you get them all the data from your phone,
and at first he was also a bit like, hmm...
- Oh, I wanna give your all your data from your phone?
- Yeah, so then he, eventually he realized it was,
it was, we weren't what we're trying to do,
so he's like, okay, I can share the phone,
and we got the data from his device remotely,
analyzed it, and then quite quickly, within 30 minutes,
we could say, okay, on these 10 dates,
your phone was being hacked.
- Yeah. - And of course,
he was quite... - Oh, then he knew...
It's not him and Amnesty who had all the data,
it's someone else as well.
- Exactly, so at that time he just knew about
he himself had been hacked,
and so with the pegs project, they talked to him,
like, okay, so this must be very shocking as a journalist,
it's not just your own personal data that's being exposed,
he was thinking back about, okay,
who are all the sources I've worked with,
who are the people that might be at risk now,
from talking to me that now it's been exposed,
even though I use signal,
they still got all the data from my phone,
but I think he was quite excited to turn the tables
when we said, okay, it's actually not just your phone,
but we have a whole list of hundreds of people in Hungary
who are being put under surveillance here,
and we want you to help dig into it,
and you did some of that amazing work
understanding the full scope of the problem
and finding many more journalists and activists
who were being targeted by under the European government.
- So you were never on the list?
(laughs)
- As far as I know, I checked my phone quite regularly,
and fingers crossed I haven't been hacked,
but you never quite know.
- I don't know, yeah.
- I know there's lots of,
my colleague in Berlin lives quite nearby,
so usually when we had some sense of discussion,
we'd be like, okay, meet you at the usual coffee shop,
we go in and we go for a walk around the block,
with no phones or computers on us
to try and plug things out.
So sometimes old school is the safest way to go.
- Yes, yeah, well, also, in Berlin
in the times of the Cold War.
- Yeah, speaking of that,
so do you have any tricks or advices you could share?
For, I mean, probably most of us,
the audience is not the main target
for the existential stuff that we don't know,
but I mean, of course we learned,
don't click on a link,
but is there something else you can do?
Or is this zero, click?
You're kind of, I don't know, close,
I would not know that English.
- I don't like it, yes.
- Yes, powerless.
- Yeah, yes, yeah.
- So I think with packets and these error clicks,
unfortunately, yeah, I don't have good news.
Technically, there's very little you can do
because they can hack your phone even when it's fully up to date.
I think the, because there's nothing we can do technically
to really stop the problem,
and this just shows why we need to do a lot more politically
to put in proper regulation on the sale of these tools
and the development of these tools,
because it shouldn't be up to each individual person
to try and protect themselves
and have their own counter espionage agency
trying to make themselves safe.
It should be up to the political systems
and regulation to make sure that this isn't,
and enhance the people who are going to abuse it.
In terms of steps people can take,
one positive development has been that Apple actually
also added a new whole new set of features to an iPhone
that's specifically designed for people who are at high risk
of being targeted by spyware or other kinds of tiger attacks.
And so it's an opt-in feature on the iPhone,
it's called lockdown mode, and if you enable this,
you can still use your phone perfectly normally,
but it does make some of the common attacks
that NSO has used and other,
what the attacks are using more difficult.
So one thing it does is now when you get a link in an SMS,
it won't actually allow you to click on the link.
So you can't accidentally click and it'll open it,
it's if you copy and paste a link if you really need it.
And so this is one way to make these kinds of attacks
more difficult.
They also have a feature to make,
to lock down your iMessage,
so that these zero-click attacks become more difficult.
And so it's actually quite impressive that Apple
have taken the steps to build this into each iPhone
for all of their billion users.
And it's already quite helpful because even two years ago,
this wasn't available.
And so we were seeing people who are being hacked today,
we would check their phone, find it's being hacked,
we even get them a new phone.
And then three days later, we checked their phone again
and it's been hacked again,
'cause there's nearly nothing.
And then we just felt really powerless,
we were just like, "Okay, I'm sorry we can't help you."
And so this is like a 65-year-old woman in activist in France,
who is the wife of a Moroccan jailed human rights defender,
and yet here she is in France being harassed day in,
day out by likely Morocco and trying to break into her phone
and everything that she could do about it.
It's really heartbreaking to see this is happening.
- Well, maybe as a last question, I have to ask that.
So you became quite a successful hacker,
so you're also well-known, so there is a YouTube video,
I don't know how often you've seen.
I mean, companies like Anasto are looking for with hackers,
so whatever good means in that moment.
So did you ever, have you ever been approached,
or is this in this community at the case
that people got approached and say, "Well, maybe,
"come to our side, you might have better salaries,"
or whatever, or is it kind of clear
that people who are working for Amnesty International,
they are quite rock solid with their opinions,
and it's not worth the time to.
- Honestly, I'd be interested to see them try
and see what their approach would be,
but honestly, I think they would rather,
at least Anasto would rather see as little of me
and the rest of the team as possible.
I know Anasto at the time, I think they were also,
they thought they were really incredible,
they could never be caught.
I think they kind of learned their lesson quite badly,
that actually they weren't as careful,
or as hidden as they thought they were,
and I think it's really causing a lot of problems
for the companies since our investigation.
At one point, the company is being estimated value
at $1.5 billion, and then I heard last year
that the owner of the company who is a private equity firm,
they basically said it's valueless
and try to almost want to write off the debt,
so that shows that actually there is some potential
for civil society working together to try
and really highlight this problem
and cause some consequences for people
who are enabling these human rights abuses.
Unfortunately, the problem isn't over,
NSO is still around, we're still tracking them.
There's also a dozen other companies
in Germany, in Austria, also in Mani and Israel,
who are trying to develop and sell all these types of tools,
so it's still an ongoing battle to try and make sure
that this problem is properly controlled,
we don't just stop with seeing one company like NSO,
who's been exposed for this,
and just, yeah, on the last point,
I was interested to see that another surveillance company
that we're monitoring are now hiring rules
for what they call an operational security engineer,
which I think is to make sure they don't have the NSO problem,
I'm getting all of their software burned and exposed.
- I mean, on the other hand,
it's also a difficult problem for people
who are security engineers and like to hack,
so how to choose your job.
How can you make, be sure you're on the right side?
I mean, okay, I've noticed the international,
but I don't know how many job offers are there,
with similar ethical standards to say, so.
- All right, so it looks like, I didn't count,
but it looks like we have attendance recorded today,
so I wanna give you also the chance to ask questions,
but first, to make it more private for us,
let's say, bye to the stream audience.
Almost, quickly, I wanna announce the next rounds
of let's pull it the share out,
so it's now pretty much monthly.
I think mostly the third day of the month,
next will be April 20.
So if you're new to digital accelerator software,
or maybe I do this in German,
it's a bit simpler since the slide is in German,
but also when you know it,
in contact, I'm gonna take you to the end
of the month, once in the month,
and we'll be able to meet in one thing in contact.
I'm gonna skip to the end of the month.
The homepage is in German,
I'm gonna go to the end of the month,
and I'm gonna use the letter.
The one at the first end of the month,
the QR code brings us to the end of the month,
and I'm gonna use the letter.
The end of the month is in the podcast,
it's a bit different,
and I should be able to get it in first,
I'm gonna write the letter,
it's a bit different, I'm gonna write the letter,
I'm gonna use the letter from Instagram,
it's always made the way.
And I'm gonna go to the end of the month,
and I'm gonna write the letter,
and I'm gonna write the letter,
and I'm gonna write the letter,
and I'm gonna write the letter,
and I'm gonna write the letter,
and I'm gonna write the letter to the end of the month.
I'm gonna write the letter to the end of the month,
and I'm gonna write the letter to the end of the month,
and I'm gonna write the letter to the end of the month.
(audience applauding)
- I'm gonna take some questions.
So...
[BLANK_AUDIO]
