API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/71301
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/dgna-56139-netzpolitischer-abend-zu-kuns
Title: Netzpolitischer Abend zu «Künstliche Intelligenz: Hoffnung oder Hype?»

Hello. Okay. So good. Hi and welcome everyone. So about tonight's evening, that's called
Councilion Telegance or artificial intelligence, hope or hype, chat to BT's consumer introduction
has forced AI into the media, academic and regulatory spotlight. Self-proclaimed security
experts warn of an apocalypse, privacy activists label it as marketing hype and investors are
rubbing their hands together. What is so intriguing about AI? How does it work? What are its
potentials and limitations? And what role should Switzerland embrace as the world begins
to govern AI? We're very excited to be here tonight, where we will hear from our special
guest, Dr. Maria Grazia-Tufreda from the Swiss National Supercomputing Center. My name
is Roberta Fischli. This is Daniel Donuch, and together we will host tonight's event
on AI. As you might have noticed, we host this evening in English. Our guest is from
And she feels more comfortable giving this talk in English and since this topic is so international, we figured it can't hurt to try something new.
All right.
So many things are new, but a few things stay the same in this format, so that's also how the
evening will go. So it's about one hour, which we also record and live stream. So whenever
you're asking questions, you're free to ask questions, but be aware this will be recorded
and saved in the internet forever. But you can't be seen. So the cameras are mounted and placed
in a way that no person from the audience should ever be seen. Yes. So we will have an introduction
and then we will discuss the topic after the one hour, where you say bye to our guests from
live stream and to recording, and we can keep talking here casually. The bar will open again
and we can enjoy ourselves. And of course, also keep talking with the evening. That was a topic.
So also, still the same are the three partners. They are very loyal, even though I try to
would like to thank them and mention them. So first of all, there is Karl Grosse,
so which is the actual building we're in now. Then we have a media partnership with bots.
So people which are physically present have the opportunity to take a watch home
and read on their on the train ride, train ride, whatever, a free example.
And last but not least, I would like to thank the video operations center from Kale's computer
club without them. So no live stream is possible. So they provide us with the infrastructure,
basically the server infrastructure for the recording and the live streaming.
So but now, where is our guest? And what is all about her? Please, Roberta, tell us.
Okay. So I met Maria Grazia this summer when we both participated in a science communication boot
camp hosted by Swissnecks in San Francisco. And I very much remember her shock reaction when she
told us that she was working for this national super computing center. And that Switzerland
was building this national AI infrastructure. And most of us were just like, what? We've never
heard of this. So I'm extremely excited that she will be here tonight and tell us more about AI,
its origins, the future and also what it all is about when it comes to Switzerland's role
in this new AI governed world. But first, let me tell you a bit more about our speaker.
So Maria Grazia is associate director at the Swiss national super computing center in Lugano.
She studied computational chemistry in Belgium where she received her PhD in 2001.
After that, she was a postdoc at ETH Zurich in the computer aided chemistry group. In 2006,
Maria Grazia started to work at the Swiss national super computing center as a user
and application support specialist. In 2013, she became associate director of the user program
and in charge of the user engagement and support unit, as well as the account management for the
for paying customers. And since 2021, she's responsible for and coordinates the strategic
roadmaps of the center. Apart from that, Maria Grazia is also in charge of the national calls
for proposals and the review process for the selection of the scientific project and the
distribution of compute and data resources. And she's responsible for the communication with the
user community and outreach. On top of that, Maria Grazia loves to read, travel, writing
and the mandatory leisure activity for everybody who swiss. That's hiking. So thank you again for
being here tonight. Maria Grazia, and we are excited to hear from you.
Well, being here is relative. Maybe you also want to say something. Can you hear us? We can't
hear you at least. You had a lot of fun by hearing your introduction. I hope it wasn't wrong.
Thank you very much. That was perfect. Thank you. And thank you also for allowing this evening
to be in English. Grab the German. Yes, we wish that we would have you here in person. Maria Grazia
had to go to Paris for a really important appointment, very last minute. So she prerecorded her talk
and will join us live again after her presentation. But where is Switzerland positioned in this AI
initiative? Well, this was federal. This looks better.
But where is Switzerland positioned in this AI initiative? What's wrong?
But where is Switzerland positioned in this AI initiative?
Good evening. And thank you very much for inviting me to this evening where we are going to talk
about the consumer intelligence opening other type. What I'm going to do in the next few minutes
is to give you an overview of what I believe is artificial intelligence, how it works,
a little bit of history, AI today, the future of AI, and then what comes next?
What is artificial intelligence? Well, I must say that artificial intelligence is a relatively
young discipline, especially if you compare it with physics, chemistry, and very well-known
scientific disciplines, because in our understanding of the artificial intelligence is about 60 years
old. This is basically a set of sciences, theories, and technologies that basically are aiming to
imitate the cognitive abilities of the humans, and also their abilities to making decisions.
So pretty much what we are trying to do is teach computers to perform certain tasks,
to make choices following rules and patterns, and in the end behave like the human brain.
But how does AI work? Actually, the AI is only a complex set of equations or algorithms
that is known as neural networks, where you have a lot of parameters, thousands, millions,
and sometimes you can even have billions of parameters that need to be adjusted in a process that is
called machine learning. And why do you need to adjust these parameters? Because the ultimate
goal is that you get reliable answer for a large set of input data where you know your
output. So basically everybody knows the story about the muffins and the dogs. So your input data
might be actually images, and every pixel of your images and then your output will be whether you
have a UC, a cookies, or a dog. There is no magic. I mean, this has to be clear. There is no magic
behind artificial intelligence. There is just an enormous computational effort to try to find the
best parameters for the machine to give always reliable answer to a certain set of problems.
This is nothing that in my personal opinion, this is nothing than the trial and error approach,
with that you try just to make it smarter and clever with certain mathematical approaches so
that it is actually less random. So in the beginning, it was cybernetics. Actually, this was cybernetics
was an attempt of unify mathematical theory, electronics, and automation. So this was an interdisciplinary
field where they were studying systems, controls, communication, in many things, animals, machines,
organization. And the first scientist that was actually talking about cybernetics was
no better to be in his book cybernetics of control and communication in the animal and the machine.
And actually cybernetics come from a great words that is used as very common nowadays,
because they are new tools called Kubernetes. And the word is exactly Kubernetes, which means
guide, the statement, exactly to give this idea of control and regulations. But it was actually
later on than a few years later than a group of scientists led by John McCarthy came out with
these terms artificial intelligence because they had to write a proposal for a conference and they
used these new terms. Some rumors, but I don't have scientific confirmation about this, said that
John McCarthy came with artificial intelligence because he simply didn't want to use the terms
cybernetics. But actually, we need to thank John von Neumann and Alan Turig that they did not come
up with the terms artificial intelligence, but they actually came with a technology that is
behind the artificial intelligence. So basically, these two very great scientists formalized and
finalized the architecture of a contemporary computers. And they actually proved that this
machine could do was able executing what it was programmed for. And then it was in 1950 that Alan
Turig was writing this computing machinery and intelligence article where it was actually putting
together for the very first time the words intelligence with computers. And it was describing an imitation
game where actually the human should have been able to distinguish whether it was talking with
a human or with a machine. And despite the controversy about this paper and about Turing,
it was the very first time that we started to discuss what were the boundaries between computers
and humans. But when are we today? Now, in the next couple of slides, I'm going to flood you
with a number of examples that the show simply showed you that we are living in a world where
artificial intelligence is actually a very important part of it. I'm not sure how many of us would be
happy to go back to the times where all what I'm going to present did not exist. What about the
virtual assistants, Siri, Alexa, Google assistants? These are simply assistants that use artificial
intelligence to understand and then respond to our voice commands. In this picture, this is how
Siri looked like in the Big Bang Theory. If any of you is a fan of it, well, actually,
the Kutrapali fell in love with her. But what about search engines? We all know Google, Safari,
Bing, Yahoo, and all the things that came before that. They are using artificial intelligence
algorithm to actually answer our search recommendation system. Why do you think that when you
switch on networks or Amazon, you are immediately flooded with recommendations to your liking.
So basically, they are artificial intelligence algorithms that look at our past behavior and
our preferences and come up with similar suggestions. I don't know this vehicle. There is no car
anymore. Or maybe there are still some very old one driving around perhaps not in Switzerland.
We have artificial intelligence in our car when we are head to drive to park and things like this.
I was recently in San Francisco and they are these little cars without driving or driving around
the city. You can book them because they are available as a taxicab. Also, the drone business
is progressing very, very fast. Very recently, I was at a talk when they were presenting the results
of a drone that was for the very first time faster than a human dream and drone in, of course,
in a controlled environment. But what about manufacturing and robotics? You know that in the
industry, they have automated a lot of things. And this automation is nothing else than the result
of AI. Also, we want what we call our smart homes, where we control whether the windows are closed,
whether the doors are closed, or whether devices are switched off. And this is all artificial
intelligence. At care, in medicine, they are already using artificial intelligence to assist
with medical imaging analysis or drug discovery. Also in the personalized treatment. What about
the energy? We all know that AI helps optimize energy consumption, optimize the grid management,
the prediction of maintenance in the energy sector. So the AI is already there. And even in
agriculture, they are starting to use what they call precision agriculture, optimizing crop yields,
and also they are monitoring livestock. Again, even in the environmental monitoring,
we received a lot of data from satellite sensor and AI helps us monitor the environmental changes,
help us understanding the climate patterns, which are all very important to our survival.
Inside the security, AI helps us to detect and prevent security threats to identify
patterns anomaly in finance, credit cards, risk assessment. There are algorithms for trading.
There are algorithms for fraud detections. And we as not used at least once these checkbox
or language translator, how happy are we that we can go in Japan? Even if we don't speak Japanese
in very rural places, and we can communicate with these people by using Google Translate,
which translate in real time in the language. Maybe not in perfectly, but still good enough
to allow communication. So with this, I am just saying that despite all the hype and all the fears,
we are living since decades in a world that is AI driven. But what is the future of AI? I was very
recently in a one day event co-organized by the AI center already at Zurich. And actually,
some of these things were presented and discussed there. The future of AI certainly is generative
AI. Up to now, AI applications were always using what they called predictive AI. So basically,
you make prediction and provide insight based on existing data. And you do not generate new content.
With this generative AI, actually, what we are doing is teaching the machine to create and
by teaching the machine, the machine is actually learning to create a new fresh output. And
that are coming from learned training data. And basically, example are the AI-generated text.
Now you can have a chat GPT that generates text for you or generate new images. So from
human description, language description, AI generate new pictures. Or we have
generated speech. Now you have AI voices that can speak and can translate in many languages
and can simulate several accent or AI generated videos. So generative AI is the direction that AI
has now taken. Another one is the multi-modal AI models. So basically,
models, this new AI idea is to train models to discover relationship between different types
of modalities. And different types of modalities could be text, images, video,
audio. So the idea is to be able to combine all these models to have a better picture,
to have a more refined picture. And this could be a very, very useful, for example,
in medicine, where we could, where actually, doctor or the healthcare personnel professionals
could actually understand better what's going on and also come up with better predictions.
Another aspect of the AI that we need to deal with, because it is here, this is what it is,
is the democratization. Basically, democratization means that AI is available and accessible to
everybody. We all know that AI, that to access the tool of AI, you just need a browser.
These tools are very user-friendly. You don't need any special training to use these tools.
And they are actually quite inexpensive. Yes, it's true. From some of them, you have to pay,
but usually the financial investment is minimal that the majority of people can afford if they want.
So AI has a lot of implications. This democratization of AI has a lot of implications and impact on
individuals or business, but ultimate on our entire society. Another aspect that is very
dear, and I think it's also the cause of very, very heated, sometimes discussion, is the workplace
AI. It is absolutely true that once you adopt AI in a workplace, you are going to, of course,
improve processes, productivity, incomes, and of course, this will have an impact on replacing
jobs, but also, and I'm pretty convinced of this, creating new jobs. So what is going to
happen, and it's already maybe started to happen, is that certain skills will no longer be useful,
and then we are in need of new skills. So there will be job disappearing, but certainly new jobs
appearing. So workforce, we need to acquire new skills to adapt, to change, and the new skills
might be as exotics, as analytical judgment, emotional intelligence, creativity, critical thinking.
So basically what I'm trying to say is none of us has lived an industrial revolution, but we have
certainly started in school, and we don't even know basically where the jobs that these people had
before the industrialization, but I'm pretty sure that we would not want to go back to do those
kinds of jobs. So of course, the generations that lives the transition will suffer, but new jobs
will certainly be created. If people are willing also to acquire new skills, there is plenty of
opportunities out there. And because AI has many aspects that make it more efficient than
human being, it's scalable. So AI can be more accurate than compared to human. AI can perform
a lot of monotonous tasks in freeing the human resources for more challenging
tasks. And of course, AI can be also faster than human beings. But if we accept all this,
there might be a new world opening up where humans have to be used for what they are good at,
thinking, taking difficult decisions, navigate very complex situations.
I'm just giving you some very small examples in healthcare. AI power robotic process automation
could be extremely relevant if this will reduce the output, reduce the effort of the personnel,
because they will perform out the tasks like data entry, scheduling, administering process.
And this will have an impact of reducing human hair or better workflows, and of course,
having more time to ensure more accurate patient treatment. Also, they are thinking of AI algorithms
that look at the patient data, such as genetic information, medical history, real-time
physiological data that can be put together and understood and analyzed to then come up with an
optimized drug delivery system, so an optimized cure. Or again, if you can, as already mentioned,
if you can automate certain tasks, then you will free healthcare professional times,
and they will focus on what is really relevant from them, the complex decision-making.
The AI can have diagnosis images. It will be the resolution. The AI helps in improving
resolutions. And improving resolution means to see better, understand better, diagnose better,
and ultimately intervene faster and more target in a more targeted manner.
Or what if they are thinking, everybody in the world will be able to go around with the AI smart
device. Some already are doing this wearable AI devices. They take your data in real time and
then can alert both the users and the healthcare providers and understand better the risks and
now actually to minimize them. So with this, I'm just saying, yes, it's true. AI is going to change
our old world. Probably AI has already changed our world without us even fully recognize this.
But what comes next? Well, the next part is a demanding part because AI needs
ethical regulations and laws. AI comes with great power, and as usual, with great power
comes also great responsibilities. I will not deny by any circumstances that they are in risks,
and they are very important risks. They can always be bad actors that they are misusing
AI's. They can always use it to manipulate people, to misinform people, creating fakes,
breaching privacy. They can be lack of transparencies. They are AI bias that we need to deal with.
And these are all risks that they are there, partially we are already seeing it. So we need to
do something. And actually, I'm very, very happy to say that the European Union
is leading this regulatory initiative. They are already at a document where they want to put in
place a regulation of the AI that they are going to present in 2024. So we need laws,
we need the regulations, because this is part of human history. We can go throughout any
invention, any discovery. And for each one of them, we have an amazing, beautiful applications,
but we will always have also a very bad one. Because I am afraid without being,
I think, too philosophical. This is a bit also the human nature. So this reflects human nature.
So with this, I hope that I have given you some ideas for discussions, and I want to thank you
for your attention. It will help me to do this opportunity. My knowledge is unique,
good, good, and unique. This is a discussion on the President's decision.
How the eco-fed us English is output, so fin and dank.
English is definitely good, right? Yes, yes. Thank you so much for this presentation.
We're going to start with some questions. And then please, if any of you wants to
chip in or have something that you want to ask or comment on, please let us know.
All right, I'm going to start. So you gave us a great overview over the history and kind of
different application contexts of AI. So I was wondering, what's one of the
application fields that you are most excited about? And then also, what's an area where you
think that we see a lot of hype currently and where the expectations might be a bit overstated?
Well, in my personal view, I think that there is a lot of hype and fear because there is a lot
of misinformation. I mean, if rather than clarifying and explaining to people what the
artificial intelligence is, it's not really an artificial, it's not even an intelligence.
It's just, I mean, it's a machine that still does what we tell human, tell the machines to do.
So I think that much of the hype and the fear is due to the unknown, as usual, again, this is
human nature. But it's also due to the fact that we don't explain in clear and understandable terms
what this entire business is about and what we are trying to do and why I'd be useful for us.
I was mentioning briefly my presentation about the Industrial Revolution. I mean,
do we have an idea of what kind of unhealthy jobs these people were having because nothing
was automated and they had to do everything by end in the worst condition or the worst situation.
Of course, the times are changed, so I fully see that. But I still believe that there is too
much misinformation and too much crazy talks allow me to say this, too much crazy talks that simply
people don't understand anymore what we are talking about.
So when it's said, a lot of jobs got lost in industrialization. So I don't know,
so for people who are afraid now of losing their jobs because AI could step in,
do you have something in mind or do you have ideas what kind of new jobs will be? I mean,
as a person also working a little bit in machine learning, I know there is a job
called data labeler and it's not a job I would like to have. I don't think that's really the
bright new future if many people are going to work as a data labeler.
So from this perspective, or where do you see here hope for more jobs, more interesting jobs?
Or, yeah? I mean, I totally see the problem there and this is why I also mentioned in the
presentation, I do see that unfortunately the generation that lives the transition
will be the one that will suffer a little bit because not everybody will be willing to acquire
new skills or not only willing, but maybe not everybody will be able to acquire new skills.
And so I don't try to minimize the impact at all. I do realize that for certain people,
this will have a huge impact. The thing is that we have to in a way be a bit
fatalistic and accept the fact that I don't think we can go back is as simple as that.
I don't think we can stop. With my example, I only wanted to show we are living in an AI-driven
world right now and since decades and jobs have been changing already. Of course, the new skills
that they are needed are of course technical skills, computer-related kind of skills and
at least from my perspective, this is what I see. And I'm not even saying that at a certain
point there will not be still some sort of routine kind of jobs for us even though there is an AI
involved. But there is the world that is evolving and unfortunately, I don't think you can stop it.
If you whether we like it or not, we cannot stop it. What we have to be very careful though,
in my personal opinion, is not to lose the focus of teaching our young people to have
critical thinking because the danger that I see is that with this chat GPT, all this chat box and
this kind of things, these tools are by no means precise, by no means they tell you always the
correct information but the problem is that they require knowledge from the user.
So if you are not knowledgeable of what you are or if you don't have a certain understanding
and a certain knowledge, the answers to the question that you pose to these tools can be
completely wrong and if you do not teach our new generation to be critical, to ask questions,
to not accept anything for granted and always wanting to go deeper and understand better,
we risk to create a generation that lives in a fake reality in the end because you believe
in something that actually is basically wrong. I don't know if it's clear what I'm trying to say
otherwise I can explain better or try to explain it better. I think it is. I do want to push back
though a little bit and ask, well, the way that you've been presenting the latest technical
developments and it's this unstoppable force and it's already here and all we can do is adapt.
If I'm playing devil's advocate, it could also a position that's very much being
taken by big technology companies that say, well, it's already happening so you might as well adapt.
I was wondering with all these big technical revolutions, there was also always civil society
that played a very active role when it came to either protesting or organizing or trying to shape
what this revolution will look like. Right now what we've heard so far was very much
kind of the technical advances and then, well, the way that we can mitigate the harmful effect is
when we educate citizens and we educate like children and then also we need to have very strong
laws and we need to have regulations but I'm wondering what can be the role in of society and
maybe of activists in also shaping this development or do you not really see one?
Well, this is a difficult, an important question but still is a difficult question because
the way I see it, of course, my starting point is what I know and what I do in my daily life,
the point is that the artificial intelligence business has grown already exponentially.
Now there is a race between big companies to actually build a super duper compute infrastructure
to do the actually to do this AI. The thing that I see it as a big big risk that nobody has actually
grabbed and nobody is complaining about is that these big companies are actually making money
by using public data and this I think is a big issue but nobody, not a single one, is complaining,
is yelling and shouting about these activists, they are not doing anything. We allow big private
companies to use public data to make money. Why is that? Why no one's complaining?
Why are we happy to give all our information, all our data to Google, whatever,
chat GPT tells you whatever you tells me becomes my property, not chat GPT, but Microsoft
is behind it. So I think there are certain aspects, again, please do understand I'm not
the expert. So this is what I mean. I try to follow a lot of the discussions that are ongoing
in this field and I fully agree with the fact that this is a big issue but nobody seems to really
pay attention and to really complain about this. From which side would you expect
here action or counter action? So would it be the people who donate or should it be
more kind of politics for the law or researchers others or from which side would you expect most
here? I think that there is really a very, very urgent need for laws and regulation to really
put a stop to all this and say, guys, we need to really think what we are doing and how we are
doing it and not allow this wild world to do whatever they want basically.
So I think one side is for sure our politicians, the regulators and the lawmakers, that's true.
But also we users, we need to be aware of what we are doing. We need to be aware of how we use all
this infrastructure and all these tools. We are becoming like, I don't know, robots but in the
worst sense because we do things just automatically without asking ourselves, what are we doing?
What are the consequences of what I'm doing? What are the consequences of telling Facebook every
second where I'm going, where I am, what I'm doing, I mean, I don't want to shift the
responsibility on users but users have to be conscious of what they are doing.
I agree. I think it's a very difficult point here and I would like to hear actually your opinion.
It's easy to say, well, no one is forced to use Facebook or no one is forced to use whatever
but in nowadays life it's quite difficult if you're not using this. I mean, I can tell you from my
private normal life so I'm not using WhatsApp for all these reasons because there is relatively
easy way out. There is three months signal, right, and signal is even for free but for some of my
friends that's a showstopper. They say, oh, I have one app on my phone and that's enough and if you're
not there then I'm not texting you anymore. I was like, what? So telling the people need to be aware
with whom or where they share the data is kind of simple even though I think they should be.
But on the other hand, making a law and say, well, it's not allowed to use WhatsApp anymore is,
I don't know if this would lead to the target as well so we cannot forbid everything. So
it's very difficult to balance this. Well, I do agree with you. I mean, if you don't use all
these apps, you basically sometimes you can't do anything. I mean, now, now there is, you can even
book a hotel without having an app or the things like this. So I do see that it's difficult to live
in a world that is AI driven and not using all these, all these facilitators, let's call it like
that, all these tools and all these things. But the bottom line is we have to be conscious of what we
are doing. We have to understand that what we are doing have consequences. I agree with you. It's
a bit, I mean, it's an easy answer in a way, if you want. But I, these are the instruments that we
have as a human beings, we have regulations, we have laws that allow us to do or not do certain
things. And in a way, I think that that's the way to go. We need to regulate what is allowed,
what is not allowed, we need to regulate our data are used, we need to regulate our data are used
so that these companies do not make money out of those. Or maybe they make money, but not a huge
profit at the expenses of public data. This is my point. I'm sorry, I don't have a more, a smarter
answer for you. I'm, I am, I don't know, I wouldn't know. I would have to think what are the other,
the other possible approaches and possible aspects. But awareness and understanding
what we are doing is definitely important. Not us, maybe our generation still has a critical
approach to these things. But I'm afraid that the younger the people, because they are born in this,
they were born in this world. And they, they don't know a different world. They don't consciously
understand what are they doing when they, when they share every aspect of their life
with these tools, with these artificial intelligence. I mean, maybe one thing
that we could also think about is that, again, coming back to this potential role of civil society
or activists, I think one of the big problems is also that we often lack alternatives in the sense
that we can't even ever, the way that we envision, for example, a digital future is so heavily
shaped by the corporate narratives, because there aren't really a lot of attractive alternatives.
And one of my favorite examples was this case in Barcelona a couple of years ago, where
there was kind of a project that emerged out of the activist scene, where they ended up actually
having government support, where they tried to create a new system where companies that were
using public data and, or collecting data about the public had to kind of return the data that
they collected to the city, so that then people could democratically choose what they wanted to do
and that you could actually use these insights to improve public life. But these are extremely,
and they're trying to do a similar thing in Hamburg right now, but these are such small and kind of
niche initiatives, and they're often also supported by the same individuals, so that I also think
that's probably something that we should really try and just push much more.
Yeah, Roberto, but this is the point of our society. Unfortunately, we are no longer driven for the
well-being of human beings, but we are driven by big corporations companies making money.
I mean, I'm sorry, I say something that is obvious, but this is exactly the point.
The alternative that we have is to not accept everything, no matter what, and try to really
expect from our politicians, from our lawmakers that there is a regulation and that we are not
simply forced to go in a direction because big companies have to make money out of this.
And also, please remember that this machine learning, this AI, okay, machine learning,
because from my point of view, it's always machine learning, it's never AI, but this AI business
requires an enormous amount of computer resources, enormous.
You know the impact of the enormous amount of computer resources on the environment.
Because we are not talking about Swiss National Supercomputer Center and the machine that the
Swiss National Supercomputer Center puts on the floor, that this is not what we are talking here.
We are really talking about the huge compute power that will have an impact.
Without this huge compute power, there is no training in the machine learning.
There is no data because the enormous amount of data required also, enormous compute power to
analyze, to find patterns and everything that machine learning requires. So I think it's
an obvious simplification to say that everything, I mean, of course, these companies have enough
money that they can build huge facilities in the desert and nobody really realized that they are
there and that there is an impact and that they are consuming power. This is also the other aspect
of the business. And again, I'm not talking about single machine that Switzerland put on the
ground, but I'm talking about really big, big, big compute facilities. I mean,
facilities that probably would need a power plant, a dedicated power plant to power them.
In the United States, this is not an unknown thing. There are certain big labs that they have,
they own a specific power supply, dedicated, not specific, so dedicated power supply.
So now, when you kind of made your own or our own super compute,
being centered a bit smaller than it actually might be. So I still wonder,
and actually I was thinking all about this all the time, so where can then Switzerland make an
impact? Or why does it make sense for Switzerland, for the government, for universities and so on,
to invest in AI, if you're such a small country and you're fighting big players like Google,
Apple, Amazon, and all them, and they have so much more money, so much more compute power and so on.
So where does it make sense? Or where do you see that also the purpose of
this international super compute center? Thank you. This is actually a very important
question and thank you for asking it because I wouldn't want to give the wrong impression.
First of all, Switzerland by no means is competing with this big corporate world because this is
not what we are doing. We don't have the resources, we don't have the power. I mean,
there is no comparison, but with our infrastructure, what Switzerland is trying to do is to lead the
direction that AI is taking. So basically, because Switzerland, as you said correctly, is a small
country, and because Switzerland doesn't really have a lot of resources that they can use,
they always, Switzerland has always always invested in innovation technologies and has always tried to
have a leading role in the development, in the direction that this innovation is taking.
And I think that this is exactly the role that Switzerland is taking. So Switzerland does not
want to compete with the big corporate world. And by no means wants to put an infrastructure
that can solve the AI for the world. What we are trying to do is to put there an infrastructure
that will help Switzerland being in the leading role of where AI is going and the direction that
it is taking. I know that that might seems like a big thing, but I mean, Switzerland has always
had this role also in high performance computing. We are small, but we are really playing a leading
role. And we want to do something similar with the artificial intelligence. So really be there,
be present, but to steer the development and direction that artificial intelligence is taking.
In a sensible, what Switzerland thing is a sensible direction, there is a guidelines that
has been provided by the federation actually on how AI should develop. And I really recommend
all the people that they are interested to read these guidelines. It's not a very long document,
but it's very interesting actually to have a look at it. Could you maybe tell us a bit more about
the specific work that the century is doing and what might be one of the innovative parts of it?
Is it just the fact that it exists? Or what do you think makes it so special?
Sorry, Roberta, I didn't fully understand. Can you repeat your question?
Yes. So basically, when you were talking about the role that Switzerland can take, you said, well,
we're doing all this, like Switzerland again is investing in this very innovative technology,
and it should assume a leading role. And so I was wondering, what are some of the projects,
or what is some of the work that the century is doing that you find particularly innovative?
Is it the fact that the center exists and kind of that Switzerland has this national project that
invests into AI? Or are there some more concrete applications or projects that you could tell us about?
So, but first thing, the Swiss National Supercomputing Center existed as high performance in Israel
as the leading infrastructure for high performance computing. So this is a very powerful scientific
calculations that are now used in many disciplines. And the fact that we were changing the
computing infrastructure and going more towards this AI infrastructure has been due to some very
important use cases that we had in mind. So we have not simply gone in a different direction,
because we were bored with what we were doing before. But there is one of our use cases that
has convinced us that this was the direction to go is, of course, everybody has heard the climate
change problem. So basically, climate is in need of the climatologists really now have to make an
effort to really be able to recreate virtually what they call the digital twin of the earth
so that they can understand actually how the climate is evolving and how it's moving.
Now, the explaining a digital twin seems an easy thing to do, but actually they still have to work
on the model. But the other problem is that they will produce an enormous amount of data,
enormous amount of data. So we talk about a petabyte of data per day. So it's really something
enormous. And so with this idea in mind that we need to understand how we can intervene in this
world where the climate is changing. I mean, we are seeing the consequences.
Middle of October, it looked like summer. It was 30 degrees also in Zurich. I was in Zurich.
We were still swimming in the lake. I mean, this is really something that can be nice,
maybe for if it happens once, but if the climate is changing and this will have enormous consequences.
So one of our driving use cases as being the climate, because we really also, you have to know
that Switzerland is very strong in the weather and climate. And because also of our long-term
collaboration with Matthew Swiss, because we are also offering the infrastructure for Matthew Swiss,
this has been the use, one of the use cases that has been driven the direction of going
towards this big new Alps infrastructure, where data is the central part. And this is what AI means
for us. So how to deal with the data flow and so applying machine learning to the climate data.
So this has been the driving force to build this new infrastructure. I hope that I answer more
your question. Yeah, I mean, that was really fascinating. Do you have
some more open questions, or should we open the? Yeah, we can. I actually have one, but I guess
there's anyways one question you don't want to have recorded in the end. So we pushed this question
to the part afterwards. So then we stop here for the live stream and the recording part.
Would you please continue to be online? I just want to announce when the next time,
when we meet the next time here for the next let's put it a job that's in roughly one month
in, on November 23rd. Hopefully then also is the guest live here. It's going to be
Gerhard Andre, who is then likely still to be a Natsan Alarath. We will find out next weekend.
And we are talking with him about Dikitade Suwanetad. And then another event I want to
advertise is the Winter Congress, so the largest gathering of Dikitade Geserseft
in the right. So this will be on Friday and Saturday, first and second of March.
Then we are at the moment we are running a crowdfunding campaign to collect money for all our
law cases which are ongoing. So as an example I'm not sure if what it would be
correctly short, so I'm saying it in German. So things like Kabul alfklerung or the
Afroldstadmeshvajirung, which we are fighting on the lawsuit case against them,
which are one of them is even now at the stage of the European court. So they are
costing a lot of money if you want to support them. So now it's the time to support our
crowdfunding campaign to support these and the other law cases where we are
we as Dikitade Geserseft are fighting the mode. And for people which are new here,
so there is a whole long list of ways how you can stay connected with us as Dikitade Geserseft.
So the QR code will send you directly to the page where you can register for a newsletter,
which shows up once per month. People who like to listen instead of read, I can recommend the
net podcast, and then we have on many better and less good social media channels at presence.
So here is Masudom, Instagram and the former Twitter link, and mentioned that we are also
available on others. Well, and if you want to become a member, then this is the way to do it.
Dikitade Gespongteon/ishmochamit. So I'm joining basically on German. We're happy of every active
and passive member who ever is part of the new digital society. Well, in one of the order case
you're anyways, because the society is becoming digital. But yeah, that's it. So then I want to
say goodbye for the online audience. Thank you for watching. And of course, thank you, Roberta,
to joining the team today, and I hope you're not just today here. You will be on
further nets for the show up in here. And last but definitely not least, thank you very much.
Maria Grazio for being with us tonight. Thanks.
Thank you very much. And thank you again for allowing these to be in English.
