API URL: https://media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93139
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-78774-qoe-matters-how-application-level-monitoring-pinpoints-network-issues
Title: QoE Matters – How Application-Level Monitoring Pinpoints Network Issues

(upbeat music)
So while we are on the topic of quality on video streaming,
our next stop is also talking about quality
in a similar sense.
So welcome Alex from Vivek.
- Yeah, thank you very much.
Ah, here's the pointer.
So, yeah, thank you for the talk before, so you explained a lot what I actually wanted
to explain, so probably we can cop on a bit quicker.
And I like the idea about selecting the rebuffering statistics because this isn't pretty much
what we are doing.
So let me introduce myself.
My name is Alexander Martin Ditoff.
I studied computer engineering at the Technica University of Berlin, and during my studies,
I co-worked at the innovation laboratories of Dolgety Tiddecom and the space of network
quality monitoring with a deep focus on video streaming.
And after my studies, I co-founded with my former co-workers, Werner Rubitsand, Alexander
Rake, a spin-off, where we continued to work on these topics and do more analytics for that,
and it's pretty much research-driven, and we wanted to find a good indicator to really
understand what does it actually mean when a user at home would say, "Oh, my internet
is not working.
It is slow."
When you go to the traditional statistics, the speed test, the pain test, the line is
always up.
So what does it actually mean?
And it is that the user sees something when it is browsing the web and would say, from
This is wrong, this is not my internet, I want to change my provider, or I want to call customer support or anything like that.
So today I want to talk about the so-called measurement gap of Ping and all of its friends.
So a short read-brief, how streaming itself works, we have a server site, a video that we want to send out, and before we bring it to the viewer, we
split up into different kinds of resolutions, and as already told in the top before, these
resolutions are then split up into different kinds of timed segments, which you call the
chunks, and the player on the client's side will then, due to an algorithm that the player
specific, select which of the next segment of the load, and then show to the end user.
And the question is, why is it that complicated?
Because we don't want this guy, yeah?
So the player algorithm can detect, house the network, or can make decisions and assumptions
about the network and say, okay, now I will switch down to a low resolution, because it
has less packet size, and so I can ensure that the player out goes smoothly, and I have
no interruptions.
The bad thing is then when there is really an interruption, which we call them installing.
So let's analyze based on the ISO stack, where does the buffering actually happen?
And this is here an event of the network industry, and people will probably correct me and say,
well, your ISO stack has eight layers, it actually has just seven, and that is true.
Because the storing happens up here.
The application layer has official definition, something like HTTP, FTP, but there is no
definition like there is a Netflix protocol, or YouTube protocol, or TikTok protocol, or
something like that.
But the users are using these services, which you call the over the top services, and the
buffering and any quality degradation happens up there, so it is the interface to the user.
And when we check out where are the traditional metrics currently located, they are somewhere
down here, packet loss, jitter latency, so you all know this metrics.
And I don't know, probably somebody of you has already heard about the new quick protocol?
Anyone?
Okay, so I don't need to explain.
You know that packet loss control mechanisms are moving up, so more to the application layer
and less control about packet losses in the transport layers.
So can we somehow derive the quality?
What happens at the application layer from the classic metrics?
And therefore, I brought for you a simplified study, which you did a few years ago, which
was a simple start just to understand what is the influence of the download speed to the
time that a video starts to load, or it starts to play.
So the moment that I really see a moving picture, so it is not like a time to first bite, it
is really when I see that there is something happening.
And in principle, you see this time is declining the faster my internet is.
This seems to be clear, but what is interesting is that it is not a linear function.
So the initial loading delay or the startup time is increasing more extreme, the slower
my internet gets.
So the quality of experience is not a linear function of the quality of service.
And we wanted to learn more about this, and so I wanted to show you how we did it to understand
a bit more on this.
The principle idea is that we wanted to build up a system which is able to monitor continuously
any over the top service, and it will interact with it via browser automation, and capture
everything that happens in the video, in the player, in the network.
And then we translate all this data into an understandable way so that I can, in the
best case, see was one view, okay, everything is fine, check mark, or there is some issue.
So I brought you a simulation that shows you how it in principle works.
We call up the different services, I'm on YouTube Netflix, all kinds of OTT platforms.
We select the video which is loading.
You see we pick up some ways like the resolution, video bit rate, audio bit rate, frames per
second.
So things that happens in the players, and then we translate it to a so-called mean opinion
score from one to five.
The mean opinion score shall reflect the opinion that the user would have about the delivered
quality.
For example, next time when you watch a stream on YouTube, you can probably think for yourself
if you rate it on a scale from one to five, where is the quality currently?
And we put this all into software which we call surfmeter, and built a lot of adaptions
for different kinds of OTT services, and we recently also started to implement metrics
for Google Meet and MS Team Souls in the conferencing space.
And we put the software into the network itself.
So we didn't put it to the user at home where you could do in principle, but we didn't want
it to because we didn't want to have to do Y for influence, we just wanted to know what
is the quality actually in the network.
So we put it to strategic locations somewhere in the access network.
And yeah, now I owe you something.
This video I'm talking about, how is it working in principle?
I mean, I could just take some dice and say, yeah, this is a mean opinion score between
one and five, I'm fine.
But we wanted to have more reliability, more validity.
And I don't want you to remember the exact name of the standard we are using.
It's called P1203 by ITU.
But what I like you to remember is that it's currently the only most validated model that
can really take technical data like a shorty before, audio bitrate, video bitrate, resolution
changes and so on and transfer it into a mean opinion score that really reflects the opinion
of a user.
So there were a lot of studies done during the ITU standardization process with around
10,000 users watching over 1,000 streams of different kinds of distortion so we had to
continuously rate between one and five hours the quality currently and this model is able
to reflect this.
And putting it all together, standardization requires a bit of time.
So what happens when you do standardization in the mean time, the technology evolves and
suddenly we have new codecs.
So that means the standard doesn't work anymore for the codecs.
So as I mentioned before, we are a research driven startup and we are cooperating with
the university on that.
So we started to retrain the model for that so that the model itself is also feasible
to use to work with the new codecs.
And everything together makes them a so-called layer 8 dataset.
It contains them as I said before.
The behavior what happens in the browser, the web page behavior.
So like page load times, render times, the video itself.
So the data around, I mentioned before, network capturing and so on.
And for sure the mean opinion score.
And now I like to go with you into the hands-on part and show you some insights.
By the way, this guy is not me.
When we have a network, can we say, oh, and our network streaming works like X, Y, Z?
Well, let's check it out.
You see here a graph where you see different kinds of services.
For the first time it doesn't really matter which services, which.
But I took here the so-called initial loading delay, so again the time that it takes to
load a video and to see their variations between each service.
This guy here, this is YouTube.
And YouTube is super optimized.
So when you call up YouTube in a bad network, usually YouTube is still able to play out
the video and the website is in behind in the background still loading.
So this is super optimized.
This white guy here is TikTok, they had some issue that day.
Don't want to consider no more than this.
But what is pretty interesting is here the, what is this for, color, purple, magenta,
something like this.
Yeah.
They have the topic that we know prime time in the evening.
So like we heard before, there's a time when people suddenly get in and want to see more
and then during night, the late night and the day, then the morning, they're not watching
that much TV or video on demand.
So for in principle, we cannot really say the streaming works in principle, xyz, because
each service is different.
Now what is the mean opinion score telling us, oh, sorry, I forget.
And remember, this is the poor quality of the network itself.
It's not Wi-Fi related, so it's really in the network.
So now, what is the mean opinion score telling?
As you see here, this is a service where the mean opinion score is around a 4.3 with one
glitch, but let's ignore that for now.
And at the beginning of July, the mean opinion score starts to slowly decline.
So this means if I would ask the viewers of the service all over in Germany, how would
you like the experience of the delivered stream and escape from 1 to 5?
Where would this value be?
And they tend now from July on, name a lower value.
Can we see this somehow in our data, a reason for that?
And you see, yes, there are more storelings.
Suddenly the average number of storelings is increasing, and storelings have an impact
on the quality.
What do the traditional metrics say?
The traditional metrics are, in this case, like speed monitoring, the ping test, and the
video response time.
So video response time is like the time to first bite for the first segment of the video.
And as you see here, the speed is pretty solid.
The ping, it's sometimes we have some outliers, but it's in a range of milliseconds, so that's
okay too.
The video response time is also pretty much in a good road, so we're here also in a lower
second segment.
So based on this traditional metrics, we cannot see why it's now the quality declining, noticeably
for an end user.
But luckily we were recording also the player version, and we saw that there was a player
update, and this player update had some internal algorithm back.
So instead of doing now a lot of network analysis and wasting hours of phantom troubleshooting,
in this case we could verify, okay, there's nothing to do with the network, it has nothing
to do with the Wi-Fi, in this case it was really OTT.
So in this case nothing to the network, but are we safe anyhow?
I never heard that this video had sound.
I wanted to introduce now these guys, and yeah, we measured also Netflix.
And as you can see here in principle, I have here the video response time, which means
the time, as I told before, like time to first bite when the first video bites are served,
compared to the time that the video starts.
And in principle you see the faster my server can respond, clearly the faster my video starts.
But suddenly you see here a gap.
It's around this value, suddenly the startup time jumps for two seconds.
I mean, in case of Netflix maybe people will be a bit more tolerant because it's movie
night everybody is relaxing and if they wait two seconds longer, probably.
We don't know.
But the question is why is it suddenly jumping up?
And the reason is that Netflix, the Netflix player has some internal algorithm which is
continuously checking back the servers that it wants to connect to and doing ping to them.
And depending on the ping response time, it will then choose which server is the fastest
one.
And if for a certain threshold they tend to answer slower, Netflix may decide to buffer
more before they start in order to ensure a smooth play out.
So this can suddenly a ping that is suddenly only a few milliseconds longer than usually
may have already an impact for two seconds loading delay.
Now more and more providers are switching to multi CDN strategies.
So you have on the server the video that you want to send out and now the provider is using
different CDNs to bring it to review them.
And the question is which of the CDNs are selected?
And when we selected the questioners, do they all deliver the same quality?
And therefore we did some analytics where we analyzed multiple CDNs.
I brought two of them for you today.
And we captured the mean opinion score over the time and the distribution.
So where is the mean opinion score in fact?
And you can see this blue guy here tends to have a lower mean opinion score.
And I mean we usually say that everything up to four is perfect.
So we don't need to be in a five region, four is already good.
So everything below is critical or gets more critical, the lower it gets and you see this
guy is really tending more going to this side.
So yes, in fact the CDN can have an impact.
So the question as network guys, what can we do?
We don't have really a choice which server is selected.
But what we can do is to shorten the peering to set the peering locations and we can set
on net caches.
So for example, Netflix, they provide the possibility that you can put a server directly
into your network and the cache the most available videos so that in fact when a user in your
network wants to watch Netflix, he's probably taking a stream that is on this cache server
and you don't have to transit somewhere, you can directly serve the video from your own
network and as far as I know, Netflix is doing this for free because they also have an interest
to make their customers happy.
Wrong button.
And finally, we can improve our inner network capacities.
I removed the song but okay, probably not.
I want to go to the conclusions.
So first of all, understanding QE requires the so-called layer 8 view.
So traditional network metrics won't get replaced by a layer 8 view but it's a compliment.
So to understand modern streaming issues.
And well-lit models for a mean opinion score can help you to better understand the impact
of network decisions and also find out is the issue now to the network?
Is it to the player?
Where is the actual issue?
And as I mentioned, fast wins exist.
So you can host an on net cache.
You can check the quality and improve the network lines.
My final two cents are it's not always the Wi-Fi.
The future grows quick so many of you know the quick.
So packet control will move up and the insights will change.
And last but not least, QE is a cool topic.
It was that I like to conclude this talk and as I'm more working on the application layer,
I'm really happy to be here and also learn from you how these issues affect you or if
you have to handle them and therefore I like to thank you for listening.
I hope it was interesting for you and let's keep in touch and I'm curious to know more
from you.
Thank you, Alex, for that talk.
Again, we have some time for questions from the room or from when you're less if there
are any.
I see one hand.
>> Yeah, hello, question in regards to the algorithm that you use.
So it seems to be very focused on video traffic.
Is there any published information on how the calculation of the mean score works and
have you thought about also, let's say, translated to other services other than video streaming?
>> Yeah, so I'm not sure if I can move this here quickly, I can give you some more slight
about the calculation.
Next one.
So the IT team model itself is split up into different segments.
As I showed you, we take the data like the resolution, frame rate, fit rate and so on
and we can put this in into different modules and we split it up into an audio module and
turn to the video quality module and these modules, they compute the mean opinion score
per second and this is just for a short time based on that thing that I told you the mean
opinion score was calculated or the model was developed that real users had to watch video
so I couldn't let them watch the started video for a long time.
So on this time, this is just a short time analysis for 10 seconds and then we integrate
it up with the buffering event data into the so-called audio visual quality model which
holds for five minutes outputs and bring them the final mean opinion score.
And then we use a moving average over the full movie lines to see where the five minutes
now to get a button impression on that.
The model itself is kind of a mixture of ground truth research and ML based learning.
So there's also a paper if you like you can send me an email and I will send you a link
to it and the question if we thought to go beyond the video part, in this case we're
concentrating a lot on video because it's consuming the most of the traffic and it's
the thing where people will mostly see that there's a difference.
If my web page is loading one second longer than usually they won't probably even notice.
So that's why I don't know if you remember I showed before that we are now also doing
with MS teams and Google Meet so this is where we are currently investigating if there are
possibilities to measure the quality also for such kinds of services.
Okay, thanks.
Thank you.
Do we have another question?
I don't think so.
Thank you for your talk.
Okay.
Thank you too.
[Applause]
