API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93183
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-78799-ultra-ethernet-addressing-ai-hpc-interconnect-challenges-beyond-the-infiniband-monopoly
Title: Ultra Ethernet: Addressing AI/HPC Interconnect Challenges Beyond the InfiniBand Monopoly

(upbeat music)
- Okay, our next speaker, Andreas Ruder.
He's a networking professional
with two decades of experience,
and he is designing, deploying,
and optimizing scalable networks on the layers two to seven.
Please give a warm welcome to Andreas.
(audience applauds)
- Yeah, I mean, if you want guys,
come close to the stage.
Let's have a little bit of fun for, let's say, 20, 25 minutes.
I will do a presentation.
The whole purpose of the presentation
is to give you a brief introduction to all trace in it.
Some of the people are already aware,
some already heard it.
The goal is basically to enable you
a little bit what's that all about,
and let's talk a little bit about it.
About myself, that's me.
We can skip that easily.
Just if you want to follow up,
if you want to basically download the slides,
feel free to reach out, and let's talk.
So all of a sudden, now.
So one of the questions is why we have
even this kind of talk at D-Knock.
And if you already think about right now,
there's a lot of data center build outs.
There's a lot of connectivity required
either inside the data center itself, externally, internally.
And you see that a lot of the people with the rise of AI
and with the rise of, let's try to use
all this kind of GPU resources,
question the current infrastructure,
question the current design,
and think about how to move on.
I will talk a little bit about this kind of technology,
what basically happened there in the last 15 to 20 years.
And then later on, we will bridge a little bit
into why this is even relevant
and why you should be involved.
And why I would say you should make an opinion,
how you should continue
and how you want to continue later on.
If you look what happened the last years,
and maybe this kind of graphic shows from 2005,
what happened all the time until 2023,
you see there was a kind of evolution in the data center,
but we didn't really have a revolution.
So we had small improvements over time
where we started with classical sweet year kind of fabrics,
everybody was still in back in the day's nose,
access layer, distribution layer, core layer,
and you just configure VLANs all over the boxes,
and you try to do that.
As long as you never need to troubleshoot
that kind of fabric, everything is good,
but try to troubleshoot the layer two to mean
with the spanning tree, that's not fun.
And over time, we basically said,
hey, I need to do something in terms of capacity,
that's where lack and multi-shasseling aggregation
came into play, where we say,
hey, we need to scale that a little bit.
So we said, hey, let's have a little bit more performance,
we don't want to have oversubscribe links,
so let's go for spine leaf architectures.
Then we found a way to build a control plane for all of that,
and signal our megatresses for layer two,
or the IP addresses in a multi-tenant scenario for layer three,
so the entire rise of EVPN and VXLAM,
where we also had a little bit of talks about that.
But then there was also a big need
that we finally need to disaggregate,
and all of that, and involve automation.
So you see a constant need over the time
that we need to do it, and you reach a point
where you say, hey, most likely the last three,
four years ago, I mean, you reach a point
where you build V6-only fabrics, IPv4,
and most of the datacenter build-outs you do recently
is not even a discussion anymore,
and now we finally need to find a way to deal with AI and ML.
But what is really the driving factor behind is this,
because in most of the cases, as soon as we have
a kind of technology disruption,
as soon as the workload changes in the datacenter,
as soon as you see a new requirement from your compute
teams, from your application teams, the work starts.
Because now you either have a higher tendency,
more services introduced, more IPN points
on the compute layer, more bandwidth.
You need to deal with that.
And the first one was OpenStack,
where we basically had a huge rise of VM-based workloads,
and the entire density of the compute recs,
started to increase.
The next layer was Kubernetes by itself,
where you even increase that further,
and you go from multiple 20s per server
to hundreds or even thousands per server,
in terms of density of endpoints.
And now a really, really, really big shift
was from 21 to 22, when a company called OpenAI
released something to the public called Chet GBT.
And everybody say, hey, now we need to do something
with this AI stuff.
But this has a lot of impacts to the datacenter design.
Another way to think about that is that.
So if you see here on the left side,
that's a very classic kind of architecture.
You have a datacenter, it's a connect,
and again, this is simplified.
You have a spine layer, you have a leaf layer,
and you have a CPU driven server.
The CPU driven server is very important,
because back in the day, CPU was basically the bottleneck.
It was all about CPU cycles, and how you can
either offload that, and how you can do that.
On the right side of the slide, you
see what you need to build these days.
First, there is a demarcation where
you don't build a single converged fabric anymore.
In most of the cases, these are either two fabrics,
and later on, I will explain why it's not even two.
Sometimes it's even four or five different fabrics.
And then you have something, and it's
called very often differently in the different marketing
lingo and in the different companies.
It depends a little bit to release the white paper.
But everything where the user connects with the data center
is called the front end, and everything
where you have basically your GPU to GPU communication,
those kind of things, referred as a back end.
What you also see on the slide indicated by the colors
is basically that you use a different technology.
The front end is basically maturity, ethernet, everybody,
what we do as an industry for the last 20 years.
On the back end, and for the people
who are potentially familiar with HPC clusters,
they know this technology quite well.
This is driven by Infinity Band and Infinity Link,
because, therefore, everything is about connecting
GPU memory to GPU memory.
You want to write from the memory from one GPU
to another GPU, and you see that.
So this breaks your technology domain,
because at a certain point you realize,
well, I now have two different competing
transporting technologies in my data center.
How do I deal with that?
What do I do with that?
And how I even manage all of that.
And then you want to go from there,
and sorry, the contrast does really
look that more smart to this.
And that's basically the goal of this kind of presentation,
because the transforming technology
to replacing Infinity Band in the back end
is called ultra ethernet.
Because I will talk a little bit what do you need for that,
and what are the semantics of it,
and what are the driving factor.
Just to outline a little bit, once you solve that kind of puzzle,
that's basically one of the most final stages you can reach.
Each of the bar is representing a single fabric by its own.
In most of the cases, that's how a typical AI-driven cluster
architecture going to look like, where you have front end
management storage totally separated.
So each of them has their totally independent fabric.
And then you also have the back end architecture.
Can be based on ethernet, don't need to be.
But these using also totally different apologies
for the people coming a little bit from the HPC cluster.
This is all based on Rails, where you basically say,
everything is a single hop away.
Very important.
But this more is a reference.
What is ultra ethernet?
Ultra ethernet is basically a consortium of various companies.
They came together and say, OK, let's try to agree
on a common standard on the overall evolution of ethernet.
And let's try to define it.
And let's move ethernet as a standard to the next level.
You see a lot of different logos in there.
I mean, it's mainly driven by all the different OEM vendors,
transport vendors, compute vendors, trip vendors.
So there seems to be a kind of consensus.
The interesting thing is, even if it was set up initially
to compete with NVIDIA, because InfiniBand is licensed
by NVIDIA, and that's the only supplier on the world
who gives you that.
They are part of the ultra ethernet consortium,
because obviously they want to listen,
and they want to see what's going on,
and they want to potentially compete.
Why is this even relevant?
And what's the problem we try to solve?
So if you see typical HPC clusters, or AI clusters,
they are all driven by GPU to GPU communication.
So you basically write part of your shop from one GPU
to another GPU.
That's called Remote Memory Access, RMA.
And what you basically want to do is,
you write straight into the memory,
and you bypass any kind of kernel, any kind of OS,
because it needs to be really, really fast.
And just once the information is delivered to the GPU,
the drop can start, you do all your calculations,
you finish the job, you give the results back.
So you want to have really fast drop completion times,
and the way to do that is GPU to GPU.
There's one standard, or kind of protocol,
which is called RMA over IP.
But people said, hey, yeah, infinite band is fine,
but I want to at least want to have the same transport layer,
so please keep at least my IP.
So you basically do it via RMA over IP.
The standard for that is converged Ethernet V2,
so rocky for the people who can follow that.
In contrast to that, you have the Ethernet ecosystem,
so everything is almost there, right?
You have your tooling, you have your operational experience,
and you know what you do.
But nevertheless, there's some of things
where the current implementation of RMA wrecks.
You don't really have the possibility
to have multi-passing in the system,
so it's a very concrete pass everybody needs to follow.
And there is really a fine,
or you cannot really have the possibility
to deliver unordered packets,
so everything needs to be either in the right order,
or you need to buffer it, and it's very hard to do.
I will skip about that one.
It's just for marketing.
The focus of ultra-essentities days
is the entire scale-out scenario,
so basically you have multiple wrecks,
and you want to combine that together
in the single data center.
There is some references which call scale-out
between data centers scale across,
but I will skip that for today.
One of the goals, and you already see that they try
to address some of the shortcomings
from the current RMA implementation is
we want to have multi-passing,
so we want to have the possibility
to use multiple routes.
We want to have a little bit of congestion control,
so in case something is either stock,
or I want to signal any kind of congestion,
I want to have mechanisms in place,
we'll do that out of the box.
I want to at least try to get it looseless.
I don't want to have any kind of retransmits,
I don't want to have any kind of lost packets,
or lost frames.
So let's try to get that as looseless as possible
and implement it.
There is also the goal from a design perspective
to integrate security, but to be fair and honest,
as of now, there's not much which happened yet.
So basically the people come together.
We as Nokia are also obviously part
of that kind of consortium and have a contributor.
All of those kind of references,
you see it right here, the sources are already there,
so I just give you a kind of quick dump of the reference sheet,
what this is all about and how all the different pieces
belong together, but what they have basically done is they,
these are the kind of different layers
we need to talk about it.
There are some of the important layers
and some of the less important layers
I will highlight in the next slides,
because the maturity of the innovation
and the maturity of the changes are done in the transport layer.
And for all the people who are quite familiar,
which I assume the entire room is, with Ozi,
I mean, it's exactly the same kind of layout.
You have seven different layers for us, the transport,
and then what you do.
What you see here, there's a big difference
because inside transport, there are two categories
which are now part of it.
One is the so-called packet delivery.
So that's all about how to move packets from A to B,
how to deliver them and how to make sure
that we get this kind of looseless operation
and we get towards the goals.
And the other one is congestion management.
So if I really get stuck,
it really happens something, what to do about it, right?
That's a really nice one
because this indicates basically what you reuse
from existing technology and what you change.
So as you see here, the green,
these are the kind of stuff which already existing, right?
There's a software layer for the people
who are coming a little bit from AI and so on.
This majority of the cases, it's either nickel or wrinkle,
which is just the four of nickel,
but it's a de facto standard.
Then you have the transport layer.
That's absolutely the blue stuff
where the maturity of the innovation and change
actually happens.
Then you have the network link physical,
but you see a lot of green stuff which just exists
and which is augmented by optional stuff from the UEC.
But that's not really super critical to make it work.
How it works, so all the sub layers
are basically inside there from a stack perspective.
So the usual stock we, as an industry,
try to tend with every new kind of thing.
We built just another envelope.
We built another encapsulation.
And since IP UDP is cool stuff,
then let's use that as our transport
and put all the other stuff on top.
That's what you also see here.
So we have basically a normal Ethernet frame,
with an Ethernet header, IPv4, UDP,
and then all the blue stuff,
which is ultra Ethernet transport,
starts to come in and you have the different layers
right over there,
which basically stops within FCS,
and then you get forward.
That's very important,
because this allows you basically to reuse
same what you do with EVPN,
VXLUN, and normal forwarding based on IP,
from a control blame perspective
and just put a stuff on top of it.
This is very important,
because where you see all the different innovation
right now, from a packet delivery subsystem.
So what they basically say is,
we have from the software layer here
indicated on the left side of the slide,
to the hardware layer here indicated
on the right side of the slide,
this is how the packet will flow inside the system.
I will not go into any kind of detail,
because it just should give you an idea
on how to group things together,
because now obviously transport,
congestion management, and also security is one piece together.
And everything is done on exactly the same header.
This is just a comparison on Rocky V2,
so what you said before,
this is the kind of protocol.
And as you see here,
IB stands for InfiniBand.
So that's what they basically use inside,
to make that protocol of work.
And one of the goals is to simplify that a little bit
with UET transport,
and you have there the possibility
to use inside the R.D.M.A. layer,
which modules that.
Now coming to the kind of not so trivial part
from a networking perspective,
because what we said before,
everything was flow control,
and order was very important.
These days we skipped that completely,
because what you introduce in the packet delivery subsystem
is basically four different transport modes.
And out of the four different transport mode,
the unordered is the one
where people get really excited about.
Because you don't really want to take care anymore,
if packets are in order,
and if they need to be stored,
or if they transport it in the right direction.
We want to make use of the unordered stuff
as much as possible,
and you see that it's basically the,
I would say almost the de facto standard,
and a lot of implementation rely on that.
What's also very important,
we now, I mean we had this before in the industry,
we need to identify the packets.
So what we basically do is we stamp each of them,
and everybody gets a kind of sequence number.
We will reuse that later on,
because what you can do,
if you can identify the packet by a unique identifier,
can basically say out of the flow,
I don't care that much,
but just give me that kind of piece of information back,
just recent that particular piece outside of the protocol,
which is very important.
Also from that regards,
there's a difference between basically
byte stream based or flow control,
and the best explanation is basically,
if you think about in the traditional kind of fabric,
that's what you use in front,
and you would always use flow.
You basically have your neck, you have your switch,
the switch says this is my table,
I build a hash on this kind of flow,
I build my next top, and then fire and forget.
And everything which matches this kind of flow,
follows this kind of distinguished path.
We don't do that anymore.
So we take a nick and basically say,
take all the ports you have,
and start to sending all the different packets
across all the available ports.
This is basically roughly referred as packet spraying,
where you say whatever comes,
take one free link, shout out the packet,
and send it to the destination.
Another packet delivery principle, which we said before,
you basically use the identifier,
you're using the sequence numbers,
and basically said, hey, I want to simplify all of that.
One way would be from a traditional three way handshake,
what you establish, we eliminating one.
So you basically sent that with the first packet,
similar to what you do with other protocols,
and you see some of the technologies for the people
who follow a little bit higher stack protocols like quick,
and so on, some of the ideas are also reused here,
and brought down to ease on that.
It's quite similar from a technology perspective.
This is something I already discussed before,
where you can do a selective retransmission.
You don't really need to say,
I want to get the entire flow back,
I don't want to get the entire packet back,
I just want to get this particular piece, right?
Please give it to me.
It's highlighted before, and this is just a usual representation
of a flow chart where you can say,
well, how this packet string really gonna look like, right?
Think about, on the left side, there's your switch,
and these are the different packets on the wire,
which you can utilize, right?
Versus, I use whatever comes,
and I don't care about order.
And one of the technologies, which allows me to do that,
because obviously people would say,
well, if I don't care about order,
how to make sure that the receiving side
can even work with that.
But think about the use case again, right?
What we want to do is,
we want to write from memory of a GPU
to another memory of another GPU.
So what we also do inside the header,
we just give it straight the GPU address.
So therefore, packet order don't matter anymore at all.
You basically have a direct target
where you just write,
think about an envelope street address
where you deliver every packet,
and the job of the GPU will anyway just start
if the last packet will arrive, to be complete.
So order don't matter in backend fabrics anymore at all.
This is just an highlight where you see,
there is a little bit of ideas from the community
and so on where you say,
well, if I really need to reorder,
if flow-based is really a thing,
and I want to reuse this kind of technology,
this job will be pushed to the NIC,
and there where you see a lot of,
for people who follow a little bit, the NIC market,
and so on, there's a lot of innovation,
like Tor from Broadcom,
where you basically say, okay,
the major difference between normal NICs
and this kind of NICs is just the amount
of buffer and queue sizes,
because you need to store all this kind of stuff
in order to be able to reorder.
We talked a little bit about congestion management.
As you see, there are two very important things
where you say, okay, how to deal with congestion
in case it will occur.
One of the goals is to avoid it as much as we can.
So therefore, there are two technologies
fully integrated into Alt-ray Center.
One is basically where you say,
I want to have the possibility to react on the server side.
So if I feel, hey, I'm gonna guess shit,
is there a way to signal back to the originating sender,
hey, I have a problem, I either run out of queue
or I don't have a problem to deal anymore,
and there are multiple technologies
integrated right over there.
The most common one uses Econ,
where you basically say, I have a way
from the receiving side to the sending side
and say, hey, I run out of queue, please stop sending.
And so those kind of messages are very important
because they will traverse back from the receiving side
to the server side.
And you can also use these in the immediate hops.
There will not be that much the case,
because again, like I said before, if you have a rail,
it's only one hop.
There's only one switch port in between the GPUs,
so therefore it will be a receiving and resounding story.
But Econ, very important to follow up,
that's the kind of technology which needs to be supported.
The other one is basically where you say,
why not giving out the start of every conversation kudos?
Everybody gets 10 credits.
If you send me a packet, you burn one.
If this packet comes to the other side,
I give you back one, because now you have another 10 packets
and you can send.
As soon as you run out of packets,
it means me, as on the receiving side of the house,
haven't received the packet and you don't get anything back,
so you cannot send it anymore.
So that's an implementation which is also implemented
very much and both of this kind of mechanism
are used in peril.
What are we trying to achieve?
Very easy.
And that's basically if you look into the InfiniBand problem,
that's how it looks like.
That's how you what you can consume
and the idea of the ultra Ethernet consortium
is basically that we go in and say,
it doesn't need to be Nokia.
And to be fair and honest, in a lot of those kind of buckets,
we are not even present.
But we want to give you as a customer options.
We want to discuss about consumptions
and everybody can build their own ecosystem
and everybody can own build their own pieces
and puzzle out how to bring things together.
That's the goal of this entire technology
and how to do that.
And what we also believe really strong as a vendor,
and this is most likely the only marketing slide
I really have without calling it out,
we strongly believe in Ethernet because, as you see,
I mean, there's a lot of things which come over time
where we boosted up Ethernet as a technology.
Coming from switching, going to routing,
having integrated timing,
having things like Synchronous Ethernet,
having another mechanism to do quality of service
on top of it, so therefore,
we really believe that Ethernet is here to stay.
It's a technology which gives you choices
which has the product ecosystem right now,
and where most of the people have the skills to operate it.
And Ethernet will also scale.
I mean, if you look right now,
we have bandwidths which reach
closely 1.6 tera these days in a single interface,
so therefore, it will be ready
and it can power up the data center of the future.
And now, that's the end of my talk.
I'm happy to get any kind of questions, feel free,
and I hope you get some kind of impression
on what the future might gonna look like
with Ultra Ethernet.
Thanks.
(audience applauding)
- Thank you for this very interesting talk.
Are there questions?
- Stefan, yeah, private person.
Is there any interoperability lab in Europe
where you can test this stuff?
- Yes, there are, I mean, first,
there are a bunch of implementation from different vendors.
There is a goal to do it in the next ENTC MPLS concres.
Nevertheless, we wait for some of the vendors to do it.
What we have done, which is, sorry, no marketing,
but it's public press,
where we did external testing authorities
with an external tester, and we basically said,
this is the 800 gig connection, I'm pleased tested,
and the results are quite interesting
because the overall job completion time
and the overall performance was even better
than this RDMA, Rocky V2.
- So, Stefan again, you mentioned IPv4 and IPv6
and one of the slides, which was a prepared one.
- If you ask me personally, IPv4
is not even a discussion anymore.
- Thank you very much for this awesome statement.
Please a warm applause for this talk.
Thank you.
(audience applauds)
