API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93199
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-74351-uncovering-blackholes-advanced-detection-techniques-for-complex-networks
Title: Uncovering Blackholes: Advanced Detection Techniques for Complex Networks

>> Thank you. Yeah, thanks for being awake for the first session. Really nice to see so
many of you. Yeah, my name is Anton. I'm part of juniper, but before I had some history
as a service provider, so I worked for ISPs various sizes. So you see this letter. If you find
yourself in the list of the ISPs, please comment and we will have a chat. We definitely have
some things to discuss and to remind ourselves. So currently I'm doing the technical service
architecture and working with the service providers in the region. So pretty large region.
And today I will try to have discussion with you on the topic of black holding detection.
This is a short agenda. We will go through the items quickly. But before we start, I would
like to first set the goal. So there are many definitions of what is black holding. So not
>> So if you were looking at the
definitions, for example, from the context where you want to
help and you are to mitigate the denial of service attack, that's not
it. So black holding that I'm going to talk about is actually
something unintended. Something that happens without you wanting
to happen. And usually very difficult to catch. So traffic is
dropped. And let's start to troubleshoot.
A few facts. Black holding might have a long impact. It's very difficult to find.
Every occasion of traffic being dropped and intended is too much. So usually get a call
from your CTO, your name is depending on the size of your company.
You usually need to escalate it highly both internally as well as externally. So usually
you would call a vendor, say, say, what's happening. So why are they getting dropped?
We will start now with a few things. Scary things. Why are the things also complex
for service providers? So we will be talking about usual landscape of a service provider.
You will probably find some of your parts of your networks on this large diagram.
But mainly we will focus on following parts. We will focus on aggregation, edge, core,
and peering, and maybe some DC edge devices. So this is the goal of black holding
detection for today's talk. So the complexity of black holding is that,
well, usually how it happens today, you get a call from an angry customer and then you
try to understand what is happening. So you try to find out the source address,
the S numbers, whatnot. And the complexity of finding a black hole is actually hidden
behind how we operate our networks. Most networks would probably not run today
the plain AP before APV6. So they would have some type of encapsulation. It can be
MPLS, it can be a service six, it can be GRE, whatnot, and it can be a mix of those.
Many funny drafts and RFCs allowing you to put MPLS over UDP, over GRE, over something
else. Then we have, of course, the control plane. We have a really interesting topologies.
So if you compare a service provider network to a data center, this would be like two
worlds, two extremes. Service provider is something growing very naturally, where you
need connectivity, where you have connectivity, where you have customers, like a snowflake,
without any distinct definition of where you have the links and nodes.
So basically the backers can get dropped on any device and let's try to see first the
complexity brought by overlays. So overlays that I use today usually were created to
carry a VPN traffic. So we have three VPNs, two VPNs, different types. And they usually
are encapsulated in MPLS packets. So you would mostly be having two MPLS labels in the
core of a network and imagine a P node, a core node is dropping something. You would
not have any awareness of the service on that P node, because the P node would not have
the prefixes that are carried inside the packet. So this is one part of the complexity.
Another part of the complexity is equal cost multipath. A bit unexpected, because the
ECMP is usually something very beneficial. So you can offload your traffic from one
link and distribute it across parallel links. So ECMP is a good thing. And ECMP is actually,
to me, it is equal to link aggregation groups, for example, because the mechanism took to
split traffic across members of a lag of an aggregate data interface is exactly the
same at least in Junos as you would use for ECMP. And then on ingress nodes, like imagine
on this PE1 node, you might be having equal cost RSVP or SRT, SRV6, tunneling. So there are
lots of ECMPs present in the network. And you can imagine that if you want to troubleshoot
a packet flow from PE1 to PE2 and using it like with a trace route, you would probably not
get the same path as if you would be sending a customer packets. Even in one customer
VPN, for example, if somebody is using, as in this example, DNS and HTTP, DNS might
go over one path and HTTP will go completely different paths. So this adds to the complexity
of detecting where packets can get dropped. So before we proceed to some advices and best
practices to remediation, let's see how network service providers, what mechanisms are they
using today to detect the calling. So you've heard yesterday as well, good talks mentioning
active monitoring that's basically injecting synthetic flows where you have some test agents
or some agents actually doing whatever, T1, RPM, you name it, it can be even up to layer
7, it's like voice over IP traffic injected over the customer's VRF so that you can qualify
how good is the service offered by this service provider. So this is a good approach because
it gives you really understanding how good the quality of the service is, but it's pretty
expensive because, well, first you would need to have those test agents to inject the traffic.
And second is that, well, if you want to be precise enough and to understand which portion
of the network is having a fault, you would need to segment and to put so many test agents
that it would probably be difficult to manage. One way out of this is actually use the embedded
mechanisms on the routers themselves and we can do it already today with the synthetic
traffic injection. Another way, a much more traditional one is to do passive monitoring.
So everybody of you is probably collecting different counters from your routing nodes, it can
be SNMP, but I hope that you are using a GRPC or the type of streaming telemetry, which is
much more granular in time, so you are not limited by once in five minutes, like with
SNMP, otherwise you won't start, you know, burning, but you can stream like once in two
seconds if you wish, depending on the transport that you have chosen for your streaming telemetry.
But you could use things like NetConf or even screen scrapics.
So to make it simple, if you compare passive monitoring and active monitoring, active monitoring
is a good thing that shows you exactly which services are affected, just because, well,
you put the traffic into the service itself. But usually it doesn't give you a hint where
the problem is, because you don't have enough segmentation usually, because the two service
points are located in different parts of the network. Well, passive monitoring is the opposite.
It shows you exactly where the problem might be, because the counters are not all right from
some device, some interface, you know, queue, whatever, but it doesn't give you which services
are affected, so these two need to be correlated in some way.
And you actually have seen yesterday, good examples that many companies are working in
best direction. So before we proceed to remediation, let's first start with prevention.
So good problem can be a good problem solution is when you prevent the problem and not remediate it.
So we have two types of categories, two categories, how we prevent the calling to happen.
So some things can happen on-box, but some things require some external control of some
external entity outside of the routing node itself. So let's take a few examples.
You could be worried about, for example, shortest path first convergence on some nodes, like
IGP, SPF runs. You could be, as well, affected by slow programming of your forwarding plane.
So nowadays, the routing tables are huge, so you have at least one million routes in AP before,
250,000 routes in APV6, you have multiple sources, multiple feeds.
So the time to dissect this information in control plane has been decreasing over the
last years, because the CPUs are getting faster, you get more cores, the vendors are starting
to create the software, which is not monolithic and running only on one core, but is distributed
and threaded. But the forwarding plane is actually the ASIC.
So we need to push all those routes down to your forwarding path, and this is actually
what takes more time than the control plane convergence. So what happens if your control
plane says, okay, I have selected my active routes in VGP, and I announce them to my
peer, but it takes a few more seconds to push the routes downstream to the forwarding
plane. Actually, that's exactly what happens. We have black holding, because the forwarding
plane will receive a packet, but will not know what to do with that packet.
So nowadays, a few things to prevent this from happening would be, for example, put
a packet on the route, so you first inject, say, IGP routes into your forwarding, or you
first inject the golden prefixes, if you wish, like, I don't know, Cloud where I come
on Amazon's of your choice. Then, in some implementations, we have as well
acknowledgments between the fib and rib, which is really cool thing that you don't only
send the route down to the ASIC, but you get acknowledged how many routes have been
done. And with this related feature is actually delayed route advertising. So if
you don't get enough acknowledgments for the routes being programmed in the forwarding,
you delay announcing those routes via VGP. So really cool thing. So if you didn't
use it before, you might have a look at it. Then, of course, we have human errors.
Everybody does mistakes. We have, you know, people doing bad configurations, people
doing bad design, which is even worse than doing the wrong config. Yeah, for this,
yeah, we can only do the validation of the config in an automated way. You have
heard as well lots of other people talking on this. I will not stop here for long.
And, yes, we have hardware and software. And hardware, and we can detect those by
some means. And that's one of the things that we will be talking in a minute.
As well, on the topic of prevention, something that is very advisable is to
analyze your control plane. Like you have your IGP and your BGP, which are, you know,
main parts of your control plane probably. And in IGP, there are many, you know,
very dangerous scenarios where you have duplicates, you say these host names,
prefixes, if you're segment routing, then you need to monitor the SPF runtime. So
something that not many people pay attention to. But if your calculation of the short
path in your ISAs or OSPF is getting longer over time, that's a clear indication that
your network might collapse at some point in the future. So better prevented. So
take those encounters, analyze them, apply machine learning on this. Because this is
a perfect example of machine learning where you could detect a sudden increase
of the SPF runtimes. Similar to BGP. I will not spend much time on BGP, but very
similar examples can be brought in here. So yeah, trying to help the industry itself
and our customers and our teams, we have introduced a resiliency interface, and
part of this resiliency interface is related to sampling the packet and the
metadata of the packet that is going to be dropped. So really interesting use case,
like you mentioned, that you have, let's take a simple scenario. Okay. So a simple
scenario, we have a P node, and it's going to, or it should be forwarding some packet.
And this packet is an Ethernet encapsulated packet with two MPLS labels because it's
part of some VPN. And then we have all layer three, layer four information. At the
end we have some HTTPS data, which is part of this packet. And then something is wrong
with this P node. So it doesn't know, it doesn't understand the top label, for
example. Or something wrong on the Ethernet level. So I don't know, wrong VLAN, wrong
destination, there are tons of issues that can bring the packet to be dropped. And
actually the worst thing is that usually the ASIC does care about dropping the
packet and you don't get much feedback in the CLI. This is what usually happens in
modern operating systems. So we can make this work better. So we can pre-program the
node that in case it wants or it needs to drop the packet, that it has already a
pre-configured collector. And it will send part of the packet, so part of the payload,
say up to 250 or something bytes, all of the headers of that packet and the metadata
to the collector. So what that brings to you as an operator is actually you get an
IPv6 packet which is easily easy to decode. And you see which node has been dropping
on which interface the packet is incoming. You see the direction of the flow. You see
the exception code. So why the packet has been dropped. For example, I have no route
to the destination. Or I don't know, so the MAC address is invalid and so on and so forth.
Or maybe firewall filter. And then you have the full headers of the packet and part of
the body of the packet. So that in one IPv6 message, you can immediately understand
the root cause, not the root cause maybe, but at least the exact thing what has been
happening. So you have all of the details required to react immediately and without,
you know, involving very difficult troubleshooting on the PFE on the ASIC level.
Two use cases we see as a primary use cases for such approach. One is that we just discussed
the black holding event, say we have a packet incoming, decision is a drop, yes or no.
And if we drop, we could have an action to export. But if we forward, we have as
well a possibility to export this packet to the collector. This is a good second use
case where you want to monitor one certain flow out of tens of millions of flows going
through a router. And you can define the flow by usually using a five tapas or
destination port address TCP and so on. But you could as well use on some platforms
what we call flexible offset filter so that you define that I want to start the offset
from layer four. So the router will know it would find TCP or UDP. And then you say
you take two bytes from that offset and from those two bytes the last three bits and compare
them with some number and then it will be a match. So you could actually define, for example,
if you look for DNS request with a certain name in it, a resolution for an A, then you
could actually match the exact string inside the packet and then export it to a collector.
So as we say, a pickup already didn't happen, so I want to see it on the wire. On the wire
we would have actually this IPv6 packet. You would have it as a, well, you could
decode it with TCP demo of T-Shark, the outer part of the packet. But then, as I said,
there is as well a payload of the packet itself with all of the headers, not only metadata,
but the payload in blue in this case. Well, you could use a string like this on the top,
really, you know, you might have heard of some of those utilities. Of course, you could use
some desectors that are available and don't require this amount of pipes in one line.
So you could go with a Goflow tool or you could go with a PM Act. So both of them understand
IPv6. Both of them can decode the packets or you could use, again, this string that I
have used in this example. And then you see, you know, all of the headers. It was two times
MPLS. It was IPv4 with some UDP inside port, this and that and so on.
Well, if you trust, you could use as well LLM, right? But then you're on your own. So if LLM
has some hallucination, it can give you some random results. Well, you need to be careful
with LLM some of these. But yeah, it's easy to drop a packet into charge and say decode this
for me. The result is unpredictable, however. So, right, the exception list, just a quick
overview, you could use this type of localization on your peering nodes. For example, if your
firewall drops the packets for some reason or maybe if the source MAC address is not in
your allowed list, you could use it in the core with your service 6, MPLS or what type of
encapsulation you use and so on. The packet itself, as I said, it is IPv6. So you have, you know,
three things streamed by the routers themselves. You have the data template, options template,
and data record itself. In the data record, you would have the packet clip and all of the
metadata that we discussed. And we are working with IETF to get it standardized. So if you
are active at IETF, please support. Right. Correlation is a big thing. So that's really
difficult to understand what is happening. And with correlating things, we need to take
care that, keep in mind that somebody is doing a change in a prefix list on one side of the
network, but dropping is happening completely on the opposite side. So that's a tough thing
to solve. This is something where, you know, there are different approaches you could use,
for example, for a service dedicated LSP, but then you would, well, you would not have
ambiguity of ECMP, but then you have back the problems of elephant flows or large amount of,
you know, LSPs. Then you might be covering your whole network with the point-to-point LSPs,
but then, again, the amount of LSPs is high, and then, again, you need to correlate it in some
way. We have some other things that we have seen in the wild that people do inject specific
cookie in the packets. So some inject packets with some specific bits present in that
packets, and they catch those packets with filters on the transit nodes. And if you did
not see this packet, you will be probably looking at the right device that is dropping.
So now, in the automation side of things, we have as well, we are at the beginning of this, right?
So you collect this, of course, all of this telemetry. Without telemetry, you don't have
possibility to do any automation. Then you have some correlation service that will be
usually some magic source from your vendor, or it could include some of the AI, and we
have high hopes. So this is something where LLMs are really good at correlating stuff because they
need to, you know, dissect lots of inputs from many sites and understand what is happening.
So we really have high hopes on this. And at the end, you will have the service that
tells you that things are going bad, things are happening, and maybe providing your root
cost. It was a link event, or it was maybe some BGP update that caused the problem.
Yeah, we have as well our own software doing all of that. I will not do any marketing on
this, but at the end of the day, you would be able to see in the UI that things are happening,
these devices dropping packets, and maybe the problem is because of somebody is doing some
commit on some device on the network. So the correlation is there, and causality is
something as well that we are working on. So I have rushed through the couple of slides at the end,
just because I wanted to give some time for the questions. I didn't want to actually
leave the stage without letting you ask anything. Thank you, Antoine, for this interesting talk,
and we do have a bit of time for some questions. So are there any questions? Please raise your
hand. There is one question. Please state your name and affiliation.
>> Elmer, quick question, sampling all these dropped packets. Is that cheap native or do you
need a service card or anything to do that? >> Great question. That's actually exactly
why we have chosen IPv6. IPv6 is UDP, connection less, doesn't require TCP. You don't need to
make sure that you have enough bandwidth. >> Any other questions? I do not see any
raised hands in the room. Do we have anything on Vendulous? Okay. So there are no questions
online. Thank you again for the interesting talk. That's a wrap up for this one. We will
be right back with the next talk. Don't forget to rate the talks.
