API URL: https://media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93229
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-80750-the-asian-internet-a-guide-for-the-uninitiated
Title: The Asian internet - A guide for the uninitiated

(upbeat music)
- Today I have for you,
Bernard Cusch from Telstra.
He's been leading the global internet strategy
of Telstra since 2018 and also is the board of M6 since 2019,
currently acting as a German.
And today he will enlighten us
about the Asian internet and its specialties.
Enjoy the talk.
Thank you.
Good morning.
Nice to see you all here.
And it's nice to be at D-Nog.
It's my first D-Nog.
Nice to be back in Germany.
I'm originally from Munich.
So it's kind of unusual for me to be this far north
of the vice versa, Equator.
But it's definitely good to see you all here.
So what I want to talk to you about really
is the Asian internet.
You might ask yourself, what is a big white guy like me
going to tell you about the Asian internet?
So yeah, I have been working in Asia for over 25 years.
I lived in Hong Kong for about four years in the early 2000s.
Started building the internet backbones
of some of the American companies at that time.
And then since then I've been at Telstra building up our business.
So if we can just go to the next slide, I think we can jump.
It is.
Even though I'm based here in Europe,
my focus has always been Asia.
So Telstra, about a 50 terabyte backbone,
mainly focused on the Asia-Pacific region.
But we do connect into Europe, including Frankfurt and US.
So talking here, really just framing this up,
some of you may be in the tech sector,
some of you may be doing SD-WAN,
building SD-WAN networks for customers using internet.
So this is really applying to you
and is trying to show you some of the differences
that I see between the European market and Asian.
So if you're doing a typical tech rollout,
I guess you'll be putting nodes around different parts
of Europe, possibly one or many.
And then each of those nodes will be covering a particular region
and you're trying to get best latency to the eyeballs.
Or else, if it's an SD-WAN deployment,
you'll have various IP ports that you're trying to connect together
in the most efficient way.
So that's basically the framing of it.
So let's look at how internet can apply in Europe.
And what I see, looking at it from an outside perspective,
from someone who's mainly focused on Asia--
so for me, looking at Europe from an Asian perspective,
it looks kind of--
I'm sure it's complicated, right?
But it looks, for us, relatively simple in terms
of the distances between any two points in Western Europe,
at least, are relatively short.
You've got less than-- typically less than 1,000 kilometers,
so 10 milliseconds of RTD.
Plentyful, cheap capacity.
It's definitely not as cheap in Asia-Pacific,
as I'll explain later.
Mainly terrestrial routes, that's, I think, important,
because from a reliability perspective,
if you have outages, they're going to be fairly short duration.
That's, again, something that's different in Asia-Pacific.
And kind of pretty helpful, I think,
is a very homogeneous regulatory environment across--
at least, yeah, across pretty much all of Europe, which
makes it-- you've kind of got a fairly even playing field.
And because of that, I think you've now
got a multitude of interconnection points.
IX is built up around Europe, and a lot of the SASE and cloud
providers are already deployed.
So we've certainly found Europe to be--
from an internet perspective, you can get--
we found extremely good performance.
We run some media applications across Europe
where performance is critical.
And we found it to be extremely high performance.
So let's compare that with Asia-Pacific.
And here, so Asia-Pacific region, the first point
is that you've got these--
it's generally quite a highly regulated environment.
But there are deregulated connectivity--
what I call connectivity islands.
So the Japanese market is relatively open for most of us
to operate in.
Hong Kong, even though it's part of China,
is actually a pretty open regulatory environment,
low cost of bandwidth within the country.
Obviously, many Western companies
have kind of pulled back a little bit from Hong Kong
in recent years, but it still has a very open regulatory
environment, actually.
And then Singapore, which has now pretty much turned
into the major hub in Asia, I would say.
Primarily because it's kind of so central,
because you've got from Singapore,
you can get down to Australia in about 100 milliseconds,
up to Japan in about 70, 80 milliseconds.
So you're about as central as you can be.
So the other thing, because you have these connectivity
islands, as I call them, generally,
most of the interconnections between countries
are done on submarine cables.
And submarine cables are kind of an interesting way
of running capacity, but they have
different characteristics in terms of your outage spectrum.
Because the problem is that if it fails,
it's going to fail for at least a month
whilst the boat gets out.
And if it fails in certain waters,
so waters controlled by a particular country,
it may take a long time to get permits.
So in some cases, permits have taken up to three, four months
to get, even to allow the cable ship to go out and repair
a cable.
So you have to build in a lot of diversity in Asia-Pacific
because your submarine capacity can be out
for quite considerable periods of time.
So you don't get probably the number of outages
that you get on terrestrial, but the outage duration
is much longer.
So you have to kind of build that into your thinking
in terms of building the network.
The other thing-- and this is kind of when I moved to Asia,
this was something that really kind of got me was--
this all looks kind of pretty small on a map.
But the reality is that this distance is a vast, right?
So the cable route from Hong Kong to Tokyo
is depending on which fiber route you use.
You're looking at minimum about 40 milliseconds
and up to 50 milliseconds, depending on--
and that's just to Tokyo, right?
So if you go on to go to Hokkaido or somewhere like that,
it's going to be significantly longer than that.
Singapore to Australia, about 90 to 100 milliseconds.
Well, to Sydney, that is.
So you've got to remember that Australia,
the population is very, very much skewed
towards the eastern side of Australia.
So out of 25 million people living in Australia,
least 15 to 20 are on the east side of the country.
Perth only has a couple of million people.
The whole of Western Australia only has one or two million.
So you're talking 100 milliseconds to Australia,
plus another 30 to get to New Zealand.
So the distances are vast.
It's further to go from Melbourne to Tokyo
than from London to LA, just kind of distances, right?
Kind of difficult to imagine.
So the distances are much bigger,
and there's also a high risk of tectonic activity, right?
So I've marked on the map the main tectonic plate
boundaries that are important in kind of that gray color here.
So you can see that there's tectonic plate boundaries
going right through the middle of this zone.
And you get quite regular earthquakes or submarine
disturbances, which cause cable cuts.
So that's why I'm saying it's important.
And then you've also got, because of the Pacific Ocean,
massive risk of typhoons in the latter half of the year,
typically, as the temperature builds up in the Pacific.
And you get storms coming into, especially the Philippines,
Hong Kong, yeah, Hong Kong, Philippines, South China,
that kind of area, Taiwan, very common to have typhoons.
And obviously, when there's a typhoon,
you can't send a ship out to fix a cable, because it's too windy.
And then finally, you've got pretty complicated geopolitics.
So there's no EU to kind of give you
an overall regulatory environment.
Many of these markets are quite difficult from a regulatory
perspective.
Even they might seem on the surface to be easy,
but it's kind of complicated once you get inside, right?
India very highly regulated.
China, obviously, pretty highly regulated.
And then you've got these connectivity islands.
So makes things a little bit more complicated,
but also interesting, in my view.
So the other thing I think worth--
and this is just I put this in really to when enterprise
purchases may be sometimes looking
to buy just the cheap internet.
And you've got to remember that internet, especially in Asia,
most of the peering managers and ISPs,
when they're looking at internet,
it's mainly a residential product.
So their first focus is building an internet
for their residential users.
So it's connectivity to Facebook, and Google,
and typical Netflix, that kind of stuff.
They're not so concerned about, is the path taking the best
path around?
And so if you are building a network based
on where you've got a control latency, or RTD,
between nodes, you need to be quite careful
what combination of ISPs you put together
to build your network.
So yeah, most of the ISPs locally,
they'll be connected to AWS and Microsoft.
There are quite a few of those Microsoft, AWS, Google,
cloud zones across Asia, you can see them.
So that's not the issue.
The issue is getting from one country
to another in the most efficient and shortest path.
So then, the other thing worth mentioning, I think,
which is kind of important in Asia, is that--
so basically pre-2000 to 2010, most of the Asian countries
basically bought their transit on the west coast,
or in the US.
So-- and that, to be honest, a lot of that
still maintains today, right?
So certainly the Chinese carriers
buy a significant connect in the US, quite extensively.
But also, some of the larger Japanese carriers, Taiwanese
carriers, even Singtel, buy a lot of transit in the US.
And we do, as well, buy transit in the US.
So Telstra being Australia.
So many-- so you can easily get routes,
which go between one country and another,
or even between a pop in one country,
and the carrier that goes to the US and back.
So you need to be watching out for any of these kind of routes
that going in principle that should only be a couple of milliseconds
was actually going to the US and back.
That happens quite a lot in Asia, more than probably in Europe.
I mean, in Europe, I guess you were seeing some of that,
now that you've got some of these peering disputes
between cogent and TT and others, right?
But in Asia, that's kind of probably more common
than you might expect.
So in terms of the traffic patterns,
so basically, based on these connectivity islands,
the islands tend to be the hubs in Asia.
So your ISPs in Thailand, in Malaysia, and Indonesia
are buying their transit in Singapore.
So traffic from those countries generally
tends to hub into Singapore.
In fact, Singapore is becoming a really important hub,
simply because you've not just got-- you got Southeast Asia coming
to Singapore, you've got India also connecting into Singapore,
you've got Pakistan, and even the Middle East,
increasingly connecting also to Singapore.
Because as we've seen, there have been quite a lot of cable breaks
between the Middle East and Europe in the Red Sea.
And actually, interestingly, the Gulf region, at least,
is closer from an RTD perspective to Singapore
than it is to Europe.
So RTD from Dubai to Singapore is about 80 milliseconds
compared to something like about 120 to Europe, right?
So we're seeing quite a lot of content
being drawn from Singapore, increasingly,
as opposed to coming from Europe, even for the Middle East.
You might not expect that.
And then even Australia tends to connect into Singapore,
because it's the closest kind of land in terms of to that region.
So when you're doing your design--
so the obvious hubs will be Hong Kong, Singapore, and Tokyo.
But then you've also got to remember
that which carriers are connected to the different local ISPs
in those markets.
So carrier selection in those different locations
is important, I'd say.
But to say these days now, most of the cloud providers
are definitely Hong Kong, Singapore, Tokyo, completely covered.
They're even increasingly building cloud zones
into Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia.
Also, although Indonesia has a very complicated
and rather restrictive regulatory environment, which
is blocking investment in that market at the moment,
to be honest.
So yeah, hopefully that helps you in terms of design.
But basically, you need to remember
that those are the key hubs of which Singapore is the biggest.
So most people, if they're coming to Asia,
the first place they go to is Singapore, typically.
So other considerations when you're
thinking about building in Asia.
So access to China, obviously, inside China
being inside the firewall, from a Chinese government
perspective, all that traffic has
to go through one of the three Cs.
And so the most non-Chinese carriers getting into China,
that direct route is kind of expensive.
So the default route for traffic to go even from Hong Kong
into China is to go via the US and back into China.
There are other routes, but they're generally expensive.
So you need to bear that in mind.
And I'll talk a little bit more.
I've got a specific section on China, which
I want to cover a bit in a little bit.
So I'll cover more detail, because Telstra actually
has a network inside the Chinese firewall as well.
So first of all that, you've, secondly, as I said,
you've got these indirect routes.
So sometimes if you're going between,
you need to check your do some ping tests and stuff like that
before you build to make sure you
don't get these indirect routes via the US.
And also, just to be aware that because of the hubbing,
generally you might think that Malaysia and Thailand
would connect to each other.
They do a bit, but mainly the traffic's
going via Singapore.
So don't be surprised if traffic is going Singapore
and then back if it's going Thailand to Malaysia.
Yeah, so basically, it's kind of the Asian internet.
It's been pretty well built out in terms of sassy and cloud.
Second tier countries tend to connect through one of the hubs.
And you've also got some of the routes back to Europe.
Sometimes can go via the US if you're not careful.
So be careful of that.
So before I close, I just wanted to add a little bit on China.
So we have a network inside China,
and we've got quite a bit of experience in that market.
So I wanted to just finally share a few things with you on that.
I don't want to go through too much.
We've got about 60 pops across the region.
But so our experience goes back to about 2006
when we first implemented in China.
So just as a starting point, the first thing
is the three major incumbents in China, telecom,
unicorn, mobile, as you probably know,
they were split back in the early 2000s.
The Chinese government split into three.
So China, unicorn, is mainly north of Shanghai.
So the region of China, north of Shanghai,
is more covered by China, unicorn.
China, telecom, more in the south.
And then China, mobile, which at the time of the split,
was mainly just GSM.
So not much data, obviously.
Since then, data has become important.
And China, mobile, has built out a pretty big data network
across China.
So they have been probably the most aggressive of the three
in terms of outside.
But the other kind of thing about those three China
networks that's kind of unusual is that there's not
a hell of a lot of peering.
Certainly, what we've noticed is the peering between the three
networks is kind of somewhat limited.
So getting between one network and another is not always
that easy, right?
So you have to be mindful that China, telecom,
will give you good connectivity to China, telecom, obviously,
but not so good to the other two.
So in terms of the Great Firewall, as it's known,
that's mainly implemented in three locations, three kind
of access points.
Shanghai, kind of pointing towards the US.
Beijing, kind of going towards Japan.
And then Guangzhou, which is kind of the portal into Hong Kong.
So all of the traffic coming into China from an internet
perspective, we would be going through one of those three
hubs to get into the rest of China,
because that's where the kind of firewall infrastructure is.
And obviously, that firewall is kind of doing a certain level
of deep packet inspection, which can add a little bit
of latency across the border.
So that's the basics on that.
Yes, so at the moment, the carrier kind of neutral DCs,
like Equinex, that you might be used to in other regions,
not that easy to come by.
And then if you're putting any content in China,
you can't easily take IP addresses
that you may own, even appnake ones,
and get them into China.
The process to get them approved is quite lengthy.
I mean, some of the Chinese carriers
will certainly help you.
But obviously, then remember that if you've done that
with China Telecom, for instance,
you may not have great connectivity to China,
unicorn and China mobile.
So what we find is sometimes certainly
our network, which is connected to all three of them
inside China, we use--
we provide kind of gateway features
that allow you to connect to multiple players at once.
So yeah, and from within China, obviously,
performance to international content is variable.
I'd say noting that the government is fairly open
in terms of access to business applications,
Amazon, Microsoft, et cetera.
But anything like Google or Facebook
is going to be problematic.
So yeah, just bear that in mind.
So that's really what I all wanted to say,
so ready to open it up to questions.
Thank you for your attention.
[APPLAUSE]
Yeah, thank you for your talk.
And so as I said, we do have some time for questions.
Do I see any questions in the room?
Please raise your hand.
There's one question.
I do.
Hi, thanks for the talk.
That's very impressive.
Given that Hong Kong has transitioned to China,
have you seen a move in importance
to what other locations like Singapore, Tokyo, maybe--
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Hong Kong has definitely reduced--
I mean, actually, it's kind of interesting.
So about two years ago, there was
a big exodus from Hong Kong, right?
Because people were kind of afraid.
But actually, Hong Kong is actually
from an internet perspective.
It's pretty open.
Hong Kong issues much less internet takedown notices
than Singapore does, actually, weirdly.
But obviously, people are kind of scared of maybe having
some of their technology being looked at or whatever
by your Chinese.
And so they've been a little bit reticent.
But what I'm seeing is actually a little bit of return.
So maybe not critical applications coming back into Hong Kong.
But certainly, because it's such an important hub point,
if you want to connect to Taiwan,
if you want to connect even to northern Vietnam, Hanoi,
and even the Philippines, connect quite extensively
to Hong Kong as well.
So Hong Kong is still a major hub.
And so-- and it's not inside the firewall, right?
So Hong Kong is definitely outside the firewall.
There is no doubt.
So it is still an important part of the internet.
And I think it's kind of certainly coming back a little bit,
but not to the same extent as it was maybe five, 10 years ago.
Right?
Yeah.
Any other questions? I see one more question.
Please say your name and affiliation for a positive question.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
Thank you very much for the insights.
Would you mind leaving some words about the connectivity
of, let's call them, politically interesting countries
like Myanmar or North Korea?
Yeah, OK.
So look, Myanmar, kind of interesting,
actually surprisingly well-connected to Singapore.
There's also an increasingly secondary hub building up
in Thailand, which is a relatively open market.
So where there's a lot of AI investment.
So Malaysia and Thailand are drawing quite a lot of AI
investment because quite a lot of electricity available
and somewhat availability of land.
And Singapore, because it's restricted in terms of size,
is becoming full of data centers.
There's just not enough power there.
So Myanmar also can hub into Thailand.
But most of the Myanmar providers also
connect into Singapore.
So that one's kind of easy.
North Korea mostly connects via China as far as I can see.
Yeah, there's nothing across the border into Korea,
so into South Korea.
But it's mainly connected into China as far as we can see.
And that may be one of the reasons why
one of the big sources of DDoS attacks
is coming from China, actually.
So from China, we're seeing quite a lot of DDoS activity
coming out.
So yeah, combination-- not sure exactly where it's coming from.
But obviously, North Koreans have
a reputation for being at the origin of some of them.
Yeah.
Yeah, any other questions in the room?
There's another raised hand.
Again, do you name an affiliation, please?
Hi, Mark Weigmeck.
Here are the renewables.
So you mentioned the challenging regulations
in Asia Pacific.
Do you see any, let's say, try any effort to change this
and to harmonize the legislation?
Look, I mean, some of the Asian countries
have kind of talked about it.
But the reality is to typically, in most of these markets,
the incumbent carriers still have quite a lot of power
with the regulator.
Obviously, incumbent carriers often
trying to protect their markets.
We've seen that everywhere.
And I'm not pointing any fingers at anyone
because we Telstra also try and protect our markets.
I can't tell anyone else the same.
So look, I haven't seen anything, any harmonization.
I don't see it happening, quite honestly,
because there's just too much divergence.
And so for instance, the Indian government very strongly
wants to protect their market against Chinese influence,
against other influences.
So they very strongly regulate.
And maybe a little bit of harmonization
across the ASEAN markets, where they've
got something kind of approaching the EU, but not
really quite.
So it's kind of very light touch, but I don't really see it
anywhere, getting anywhere near what we've got in Europe.
Yeah, yeah.
Too much geopolitics, I'm afraid.
OK, any more questions?
If not, then again, Ben Art, thank you for the talk.
Thank you.
