API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93205
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-73667-pppoe-vs-ipoe-a-practical-guide-for-isps
Title: PPPoE vs IPoE: A Practical Guide for ISPs

(upbeat music)
- Our next presenter is Christian Giesen.
He is a BNG protocol developer
and professional service engineer at RT brick,
specializing in PPE, sorry, PPE/L2TP,
DHCP, Radius, and Related Access Technologies.
He started his career at Deutsche Telekom Agai
in the Access BNG department
before moving to Juniper Networks.
Please join me in welcoming Christian to the stage
and enjoy the talk.
(audience applauding)
- Yeah, thanks for this nice introduction.
So it's now 18 years ago
when I started to work on my
first B&G project at this time
to frame two legacy versus modern.
And I would like to change this framing
since they move rely on protocols from the 90s,
stretched far beyond average their purpose.
But what really matters is how these protocols
does actually affect your daily operations,
troubleshooting, and the customer experience.
But before we go into the actual presentation,
please take a moment and think about
which of these protocols stacks you intuitively prefer,
because a lot of you already have an opinion,
have a lot of work experience with BNGs and protocols.
And after the presentation, please think back and see
if your opinion has been confirmed
or maybe perhaps changed.
So, but let's start with what is PPE/PPE and what is IPOE.
Both are technologies or protocols stacks used
between the CPE at home.
So your Fritzburgs, your speed board,
or whatever CPE you use.
And the BNG of your service provider.
And they are used to authenticate the subscribers
to the customers at home,
to give them the dynamic IP addresses
and do some basic, really basic configuration
of the services like DNS servers, the MTU for PPE/PPE.
Maybe giving the URL of the ACS server,
but it's just the basics you need to go into the internet.
It's not a CPE management protocol.
And I always talked about protocols stacks, not protocols.
And this is because an example for PPE/PPE.
Of course, there is the PPE protocol.
But the PPE protocol is an extension
of the actual PPE/PPE protocol to be usable over ethernet.
And then there's also the actual PPE protocol.
Then we have authentication protocols like PUP and SHUP.
There is the, for IPV4, we have the IPCP protocol.
We have the IPV6 CPE protocol for IPV6.
But we also have ICMPV6 routed advertisements,
as well as DHCPV6 for delegated prefixes.
And they are slightly different implemented
for PPE/PPE than actually implemented
for normal ethernet networks.
So they belong to the PPE stack here.
There is a tunneling protocol in PPE/PPE
called A2TPV2, which allows to extend the PPE session
over a free network.
And there are many legacy options
like the PPE/P compression protocol I excluded here.
But you see the protocol stack
instead of just a single protocol.
And then on the other hand, I have IPUE.
In an IPUE, we talk about two fully independent
protocol stacks, instead of one large protocol stack.
We do have for IPV4, DHCPV4, plus obviously up,
proxy up.
And in IPV6, we have DHCPV6.
And ICMPV6 for routed advertisements,
for neighbor discovery.
So you can see here on this picture
that we have on the one side.
We have PPE/PPE as a very large feature which stack,
transporting all the protocols, all these up protocols.
And on the other hand, we have two very lightweight,
fully independent protocol stacks, five PPE.
So let's explain this a bit better on a session setup.
In both cases in PPE/PPE and here in this example for DHCP,
the CPE starts with a broadcast message.
So in PPE, it's a Padai message.
Indeed, it's a discovery message to search for BNGs.
And in both cases, it's possible that one or multiple BNGs
may respond with an offer.
So it's very popular to use this for redundancy,
just put more BNGs into a broadcast domain.
And then the CPEs have to select out of the offers,
one of them, and do request the extra service.
So in the first few, you could think about these
are very similar protocols.
The handshake looks very, very similar.
But for DHCP, the session setup has been finished.
Of course, a bit of address resolution up is needed,
but we are actually almost done.
In PPE, PPE, we just started.
So now in PPE, we go to the link phase.
Then there's the authentication phases.
We do have the actual IPv4 and IPv6 network phases.
And then finally, our keep in life switch continuously running.
So you could think about definitely PPEs
the more complex stack, but before coming to this conclusion,
don't forget, we have to do it twice for IPOE.
So instead of having one large stack,
we have to do everything twice.
And for DHCPv6, we also, again, center--
in this case, a multi-cast message.
There's no broadcast in IPv6.
Looking for BNGs, and then also one or two BNGs or more
can respond.
And then there's the first problem we have with two stacks.
In this very simple example, having two BNGs,
it might be possible that IPv4 selects BNG1
and IPv6 selects BNG2.
It's a problem.
Of course, there are solutions vendors find
figured out to solve this, to control this.
But this also adds additional complexity
to your protocols stack.
So therefore, would finally you can say, OK, maybe the difference
is not that big in complexity here.
So-- and of course, we have to deploy protocols.
And in PPPOE, the BNG is always the PPPOE server.
And the CPA at home is the PPPOE client.
And between the PPPOE client and the server,
very often-- not always--
have an access node, an Amazon, an OIT.
And that can run an intermediate agent.
This is defined in the TR101.
And the intermediate agent is used to, let's say,
take the packets sent from the client to the server.
So in this case, the DHCP discovery packages,
the first four packets.
And add additional information into it.
So which means the Amazon or the OIT takes the packets
and adds the description of the physical port.
So for DSL, it gives information which DSL port is used.
It can give information which bandwidth
was dynamically negotiated, which
DSL protocol is used, which framing.
And for-- yeah.
And of course, the identifier of the line, which then
can be forwarded to the BNG.
And then the BNG can authenticate a customer,
either based on these informations,
or for PPP also based on the username on the password
and authentication, not always, but very likely
happens in the radius server.
And if you go to IPOE, it looks very similar.
So the BNG might be the DHCP server.
The CPAE might be the DHCP client.
Also, the OLT or the Amazon may behave as an intermediate agent.
But again, here, the OLTs or the Amazon's
have to do it twice.
So there are two different protocol stacks.
We have two different intermediate agents, one for DHCP
before, which is called layer two DHCP relay agent,
as defined in a TR-101.
And the DHCP V6, lightweight DHCP V6 relay agent,
as defined in an FCE.
And they should hopefully add the same informations
and prove protocols, because we don't know which one comes first.
And we authenticate with the first protocol to subscribe.
And again, you may have radio servers.
It's not mandatory, but likely you do have.
But in IPOE, there's an alternative.
You can also have a centralized DHCP server.
So then instead of acting as a DHCP server in a BNG,
we can just forward the messages to the DHCP server.
But you may think, why is there still a radio server
in this picture?
And this is because the DHCP server cannot
replace the radio server.
So very likely you still need all the radio server,
because you cannot do accounting in DHCP.
I cannot inform the DHCP server about how many data volume
was used.
I cannot change the cross profiles.
So typically, what you do here is that the first DHCP packet
is then buffered in the BNG, and then request
the sent to the radio server.
Then the radio server can authenticate,
can inform about OK, this is the bandwidth the customer
has booked.
These are the cross profiles.
And only then the packet is forwarded to the DHCP server.
So you see if you decide for this option,
it doesn't mean you don't need a radio server.
You just have two servers.
But there are advantages of doing this.
And yeah, it's a popular thing.
People do this.
Sometimes people run a DHCP server.
Sometimes people prefer to run a BNG, which is also
a bit like depends on the features of a BNG.
Because of course, if you use the DHCP server,
you may have more control over DHCP options.
But of course, a lot of BNGs also have the possibility
to control almost all DHCP options.
So it's a bit depending on the actual BNG vendor
you have, which solution you likely select.
So let's go into the detailed comparison.
So this is why we are here, see how the protocols compare
to each other.
And I would like to start with a very important thing here.
And this is interoperability between clients and servers.
And in my opinion, PPPIE has the much better client
compatibility.
And let me explain why I think this is the case.
And a very important point here is frame droughts.
So assigning an IP address, especially
if I use public IP addresses, it's very likely we all prefer
to just give a host address.
So I just design multiple slash 24 networks.
I change them.
And then just design one address by address by address.
But I would not preserve a gateway address, a network
address, and then just ensure that I
have a gateway network in the same IP address.
So I just give addresses and use my loop packet
address as the default gateway.
This is the most comfortable way and most
address efficient way to handle IP addressing.
But actually, it's not permitted in IPE.
Because the IP standard enforces that you have,
your default gateway in your network.
But your network is a slash 32.
It's not possible.
But a lot of CPE is supported.
But there are also some CPEs.
They say, no, it's not permitted.
I don't support it.
But CPE is built for the broadband market often supported.
But still, it's a hack.
It's nothing which is officially standardized.
So even if it's common, it's not a standard.
Then IPE relies heavily on proxy app.
Proxy app means that the client sends an app request
for an IP address.
And the B&G responds even if this IP address doesn't
belong to him.
This is important in special with slash 32s.
We have seen a lot of CPEs doing very strange things
if we assign a slash 32, meaning that they sometimes
start resolving their DNS servers via the B&G.
Then we get a lot of IP address requests
to resolve for one address.
OK, then we have to resolve them if we
have to respond with our own Mac address.
But also if I use a, let's say, more classic approach,
having a network, the IP in the gateway,
if the clients would like to communicate with Finn
the subnet, then, of course, we need proxy app
because we prevent communication between clients not
going over the B&G for legal reasons.
And another important point is DHCPv6.
DHCPv6, compared to if DHCPv4, only
assigns the wire address and the line addresses,
but not a default gateway.
But I have seen a lot of deployments or a few deployments.
Actually, not a lot.
They don't send router advertisements.
And then the CPE market solved this problem
by just saying, OK, if the B&G doesn't
send a router advertisement, let's create a default gateway
out of the DHCPv6 search address.
OK, it works.
But again, it's a hack.
And it's something we also have here in Germany.
I have seen this.
And then CPE, C in German market,
they implemented this hack and say,
but, yeah, it doesn't make it good.
It's still a hack.
It's a workaround.
And we heavily rely on undocumented workarounds.
So, oh, it's not a good idea.
And this brings me to the conclusion
to say, PPPOE has the better compatibility
because it's fully standardized.
There's not much.
CPEs can do differently compared to as we have it in IPOE.
Then one of the pain points for PPPOE, MTU.
So the internet uses MTU 1500.
All data centers or servers, my home run is always 1500.
But PPPOE is limited to 1492.
So there is a high risk of fragmentation.
But again, CPEs are smart.
They invented MSS clamping.
MSS clamping means that the CPE just takes the TCP packages.
And in the TCP handshake, they change the maximum segment
size to ensure that there is no fragmentation happening.
And this works very well for TCP, but not for UDP.
And a lot of UDP is quick.
But luckily, the people behind CPEs
decided that CPEs has a maximum packet size of 1280 bytes.
So no issue for PPPOE.
So then the only remaining pain point here is CIP a bit.
CIP has very large UDP packets.
And this is the most fragmented packet you see in PPPOE.
CIP, because they are always then fragmented out
of the data center, because it's bigger than 1500 bytes.
And then we have to fragment the fragmented packets again
before we send them to the client, which works.
But yeah, it's not nice.
But we also have a solution here.
It's the RC4-638, which is supported by almost all BNGs
in the market and allows to negotiate an MTU 1500 on PPPOE.
But it's not heavily deployed.
So the BNGs, they're typically supported.
But the number of CPEs supporting it are limited.
Luckily, the most common CPE in Sherman is a portrait,
but it's not enabled by default.
And the nice thing on this RFC is the protocol developers
decided that the CPE first has to signal in the PPPOE message,
I support this RFC.
Then the BNG has to send, I also support it.
And then they know we can negotiate a larger MTU.
So it's very risk-free as our provider to enable it,
because CPEs don't support it.
They will not have any compatibility issues here.
And if the CPE supports it, they can negotiate higher benefits.
So I highly recommend for all of you operating PPPOE,
please enable it.
And then also enable it on the CPE,
and then we have less fragmentation here.
Mudicast was one of the drivers for the success of IPOE.
And you know, in PPPOE, it's a point-to-point protocol,
which means I have a tunnel between the CPE and the BNG.
And this means the last replication
point I can have is the BNG, which
means if there's the football world mastership,
I have to send the same game again and again
and again over my aggregation and access network, which
isn't that efficient.
And in comparison, in IPOE, I can have
further application, multicast replication points,
in my aggregation.
And very popular on all T's, they have a smart feature
that they can even send the multicast channels only
once per point tree.
So they have dedicated multicast gem ports.
So you can also ensure that even within the point tree,
every multicast channel is only sent once.
And this was very, very popular and was one of the main drivers
here.
But again, you all know multicast becomes history.
So the trend goes through unicast TV.
And therefore, it's up to you if this is a very important thing
for your network or not.
If you only have multicast TV, maybe you can ignore this point.
If you rely heavily on multicast,
this is an important point for you.
Keep the lives.
PPPOE has an built-in feature for keep the lives,
meaning the client can send keep the life messages
to server can then keep the life messages,
typically every 30 seconds.
And then you can very fast identify
if there's an outage of the server, of the link.
The server can identify the CPE has been disconnected
or there's an outage.
So it's very stable for your network to have keep the lives.
In IPOE, unfortunately, we do not have.
And some vendors, they implemented some workarounds.
They say, OK, let's use ARP as a keep a life,
or enable discovery as a keep a life.
But it's something you cannot heavily rely on,
and it only works in one direction.
The B&G may identify as with this if the CPE is still there.
But the CPE cannot identify the B&G is still there.
Because then the CPE needs to implement this.
And as a B&G vendor, we would not be so happy
if the CPE starts sending massive ARP requests.
So we would not push this into the market.
And keep the lives is important for this perfect here,
which is redundancy.
And with redundancy, we have to split in stateless
and stateful redundancy.
And you may remember the first flow diagram I have shown
with the two B&Gs in the network segment.
And it was very popular to do stateless redundancy,
just meaning I have a podcast domain.
I put one, two, three, or four B&Gs into this.
And then multiple G&Gs can respond to.
And I can control this a bit, which one,
and how to balance the load.
And it's just simple and stateless.
So if the B&G has an outage, then the keep the lives ensure
that the client recognizes this.
Keep connects, the next B&G takes over.
And this is super, super stable and efficient.
It even works with different vendors.
You can say vendor A, vendor B.
I can have different software versions.
It doesn't matter.
They don't need to talk to each other.
This is super nice.
And very, very popular in PPPUE.
But as you see, they rely on un-reconnecting the CPE.
So which means without keep the lives,
it may take a lot of time for the CPE
to identify the B&G has been reconnected,
or has been an outage to reconnect on.
And this is why you see that stateless redundancy
is very, very popular for PPPUE.
But a bit less popular for IPUE,
because here I don't have to keep the lives.
And therefore, IPUE deployments, if you see redundancy,
very likely they use state for redundancy,
which means you have two B&Gs.
And then you have synchronization,
protocol between, which is normally
proprietary because there is no standard for this.
And then you need two B&Gs from the same vendor
with compatible software versions.
And then you can replicate your actual state
between the two B&Gs.
And if there's an outage, the other B&G can take over.
But just the advantage is that downtime is shorter.
Maybe a few seconds compared to, let's say, 90 seconds,
maybe in PPPUE, depending on the keep the life interval.
But it has a higher risk of failing,
because it's much more complex.
You rely on the same software version.
So even if it works, it works much better.
There is a complexity that it doesn't work.
And if it does not work, troubleshooting it
is not that simple.
So yeah, you see there are these two different options.
And yeah, authentication.
In-- I explained before that there
is the possibility that the OLT or the access notes
they can add additional information
into the PPPUE or the HCP packets
identifying the customer line.
And this is heavily used to authenticate customers
in special for IPUE.
And it's also the only way to authenticate IPUE customers.
Of course, you can may use the megatrends of the CPE
to authenticate the customer.
But then you have to trust the megatrends.
Whereas the intermediate agent you can trust,
because they also override information.
This is the client manipulates the CPE as this information.
The access notes are written to wipe out information
sent from the client, override this with them.
And then you can use this as a dressed anchor to identify.
This is the customer aid.
This is the line of this customer.
I can authenticate this.
And this is line authentication, which
works for PPPUE in IPUE.
But if you do not have the possibility
to add these informations, then authentication
is possibly much more difficult for you.
And then you possibly prefer PPPUE,
because here you can still use username and password,
which you cannot do with IPUE.
And then there is something I really, really, really
miss for IPUE.
This is the server-side disconnect.
So the server-side disconnect means I, as an operator,
being able to force the CPE to reconnect.
And this might be very important and special for maintenance
cases.
I would like to reboot my BNG.
Then I just send a message for the CPE
that I don't need to evade, that they identify and keep
the lives that the BNG has been rebooted.
Or another important use case is sometimes you change
your configuration in a way that the BNG cannot apply
the changes without reconnecting.
So then you change your configuration,
you wait for the maintenance window,
and then you kick all your subscribers.
And then after reconnecting, they
have the new configuration applied.
But for IPUE, you have to wait for them to reconnect.
It's much more difficult.
I know a few operators, the trust users have worked around.
If they need the CPEs to reconnect for IPUE,
they just switch off the OTs for a few seconds.
Then there's a light off.
And then the CPEs reconnect as well.
But this doesn't work if you use an external modem
behind an external owner.
But if you have an internal, it works.
But it's again, it's some kind of a hack.
I would love to have servers that
are just connecting DHCP with 6.
Maybe someone in the working groups or in the IETF
adds this to DHCP.
This would be very, very nice here.
And then performance.
Performance is an important point here.
And if you do have a physical BNG, an ASIC-based BNG,
very traditional ones from the big vendors,
then it doesn't matter if you do PPPUE or IPUE.
They all have ASICs implementing these protocols
at line rate.
There's no issue here.
But if you do have a virtual BNG,
or maybe you have some kind of a cheap BNG appliance,
so there are some appliance on the market.
They are working mostly virtual in software,
but have some basic hardware offloading.
Then you often see an enormous performance
input using PPPUE, because this is the key here.
The hardware offloading of these sometimes very cheap
ships used for the offloading.
They are often not able to pass a PPPUE packet
so they don't can do PPPUE offloading.
And this is what you see then if you do some virtual BNGs
or if you use appliances with a virtual BNG forward,
or some CPE, sometimes you use firewalls as a PPPUE client.
And then you see why is the performance so bad,
because they often use some kind of hardware offloading.
And then if the hardware offloading cannot be used,
you see an enormous performance difference to IPUE
and PPPUE.
And this is why I say it depends.
But in the average IPUE has a better performance.
But most of the time, it does not matter.
If you have a modern CPE at home,
they have so much performance through even one gigabit
connections on PPPUE.
A hardware-based BNG even has no issue here.
But there might be scenarios, especially for very, very
small deployments where this might be an important thing
to you that you have to consider that PPPUE may
have an performance impact on your setup.
Then, VLAN mode.
In portband, we have two VLAN modes, one-on-one and end-to-one,
which means I have a dedicated VLAN for all of my subscribers.
So one household, one subscribers, one VLAN.
And end-to-one means in one VLAN,
I can have multiple subscribers.
And this is important in this context,
because if I use end-to-one VLAN mode,
if I use PPPUE as a hardware vendor,
it's very easy to still identify all traffic, which
belongs to one customer, but just matching
on the PPPUE session.
It is a very small, tiny idea.
I can use, instead of the VLAN, to say, all traffic of this VLAN
idea, I match into one logical interface.
And this is my subscriber interface,
and then I can attach my course on it.
And if I do IPOE, as I mentioned,
I have two protocols that are fully independent.
I need to identify which traffic belongs together
to do my course operations on it when accounting on it.
And then we have to use the MAC address, which
is slightly bit longer.
And in some network or ship set architectures--
OK, sorry.
This may cause some limitations of the features
that, because of addition, they look up step.
You sometimes have some features they don't work with IPOE
end-to-one, where they work with one-to-one,
or they work with end-to-one and PPPUE,
because you need one more look up to identify all traffic
to one subscriber by the MAC address.
Then accounting is not that important anymore.
So both technologies, I can use volume accounting.
But if you need very unlikely time accounting,
then, yeah, then you prefer PPPUE,
because, see, you have a proper first and last sign of life,
keep the lives, but likely or luckily,
nobody is doing time accounting anymore.
So therefore, this is not that important.
But, yeah, back in the time, if you had time accounting,
this was also something you would not do on an IPOE network.
And then tunneling.
So as I mentioned before, PPPUE supports A2TP.
And this is some kind of a layer-free bitstream access.
And it's very, very popular, because I
don't need some negotiations with the woodshead partners.
I just need their IP address, OK.
And then I can just tunnel my connection to them.
So let's come to my final closing.
After we have seen all the points left and right,
or let me quickly go back.
And you see a lot of cream on the left side.
A bit more cream by PPPUE and a bit more right on IPOE.
But this doesn't mean PPPUE is the better protocol.
Please don't come to this one conclusion here.
Because the question is not which protocol is better.
The actual question here is which protocol is better for you.
And for you, it means if you need multicast,
it's clear which one you need.
If you need A2TPUE, it's an easy decision.
If you have a virtual B&G, of course, you prefer IPOE.
So it's not like PPPUE is better, IPOE better.
It's always-- it depends on your setup.
So finally, I would say PPPUE is not a legacy protocol,
but IPUE is not modern.
And both are hacks for broadband.
And which one you prefer is up to you.
[APPLAUSE]
Thank you, Christian, for this insight.
We have time for some questions.
Please remember to stay to your name and affiliation
before asking your question.
We will also relay some questions
from venue less if time permits.
Yes.
Thank you very much for that amazing presentation.
My name is Daniel from the Dataskone.
And I have a question to your present answer
to the overview.
What do you think about the QS marking in our upstream
for PPPUE and IPOE?
I think it's a little bit challenging for PPPUE, right?
The QS marking.
The first marking, I think, here is no big difference
for both protocols.
So this works in both cases, very similar.
So I don't see this as a driver to decide between one
or the other.
So first marking, screenwriting, yeah.
Of course, I have IPV4 and IPV6, different markings.
But yeah, it's not one of the drivers.
My name is Too much.
I was so sorry.
Hi.
Sylvan from Open Factory.
One question about IPOE that I'm currently working on
is the support of frame droughts,
especially in wholesale environment,
because that's normally realized as DHCP
related to radios with VRFs over PGP.
Yeah.
Frame code is always a difficult topic,
because it's easy to inform the BNG
about the framed routes which are available behind the PPPUE.
But it's very difficult to tell the CPE,
which framed routes they have to get,
because there is no standard protocol to do this in line.
You always have to do this externally to inform them.
So there's no DHCP options or PPPUE options to say, OK,
you have this, this, this, and this network behind you,
unfortunately.
But there are options to tell the BNG, which networks
are behind the CPE, but we cannot tell this the CPE.
So you always have to do this in line,
or you have to pre-configure the CPEs,
or you have to use an additional protocol
for this, but we cannot signal this in the DHCP session,
or in the PPPUE session directly.
My name is Tomal Shafer, University Munich.
As I've seen, you are investigating the dual-stack scenario.
Did you have also a look of DSLight,
which may have more advantage and disadvantage in both cases?
The advantage is if you do DSLight,
you have only one protocol stack for IPUE,
which hardens your problems.
So you only have DHCPv6 then, and then it's much easier
to operate IPUE.
In China, where you could say if you do single-stack DHCPv6
only and do IPv4 as an overlay, then, of course,
a lot of issues you may have with IPUE,
you don't have anymore, because you have only one
stack to operate instead of two stacks to synchronize.
But most likely, people do dual-stack IPv4 IPv6,
but, yeah, if you do single-stack,
things are becoming easier.
Well, that's a wrap for this presentation,
and please rate the talk, and now it's time for coffee.
Enjoy.
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
