API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93345
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-75852-edge-of-your-seat-streaming-inside-waipu-s-terrabit-scale-live-video-cdn
Title: Edge-of-Your-Seat Streaming: inside waipu’s terrabit-scale live-video CDN

(upbeat music)
- Our first talk will be hot by Leo from Waipu.
He is an engineer mainly working with Golang
and programming their videos streaming.
So now welcome him on the stage.
Give him a big round of applause.
(applause)
See you later.
Hello, hello. I can hear myself. Good. Great.
Hello, I'm a video streaming. I'm a GoFir. I'm a GoLang. I'm an infrastructure lead at Waipu. I'm not a networking person. So go easy on me. So why build a CDN? The first thing that you should ask yourself.
is why the help you want to do that. And we ask ourselves the same thing. First important
point is that video for us is our core business. So, of course, the CDN, so how the video actually
gets to the customer is a very important thing to us and something that is front and center on the
day to day work that we do. So, it's obviously, that is going to get a lot of attention from the
whole company. And then you ask yourself the question. You're tasked with this task of delivering
video to customers. The first thing is, stand there in front of the computer and ask, "Okay, can I
buy this maybe?" And video streaming is probably one of the few markets now a day or one of the
few areas now a day where it doesn't really make sense to buy it because it's really prohibitively
expensive, if you want to buy it from the local hyperscaler of choice around the corner.
So that's the first thing that should scare you off a bit. But there are other reasons
we're going to get into later. This is like the big elephant in the room. And then you
start to think a bit more about it. And you notice that the current protocols for doing
video online, you may not have never heard of them, but HLS and dash are the ones that
are being used basically everywhere. They're very HTTP friendly. So, at that point, the
latest, when tasked with that task of building a CDN, you should ask yourself, okay, I can
buy it, but it's just HTTP, right? So, can I just not put Nginx in front of it? And
we did that, and it worked for multiple years, kind of. And to understand that, kind of,
you have to take a little step back and see what's going on, what are we actually working
with? Not just video, but what kind of video, exactly? Our traffic is 90% live TV. And
how does live TV work? Just a very high-level overview. You have this wonderfully vintage
television client accessing a network that is, therefore, the scaling that CDN, in turn,
gets content from the so-called origin server. It's a very video-specific term. I had never
heard this name before starting to work with video six years ago. So, you've probably never
heard of it either. But that's basically the place where this -- the single source are
through for your video content, where it's actually coming from and gets -- has to be
delivered to all the clients accessing it. And from the other side, it gets kind of pushed
into this origin server from ingest. So, basically, the content from your television
channels that is ingested into our network and lands in a place that then can be spread
around the internet. So, what was missing in the setup that we had the first few years?
The first thing is maintainability. It grew fast. It grew well enough to deliver our first
million of customers. But it wasn't easy to deal with. So, it was a setup with -- it
was a setup with a lot of lower code. It was a setup that no one was really comfortable
maintaining when things went wrong, like they always do. It wasn't a very comfortable place
to be the one sitting in the chair having to debug and maintain that code. The second
big thing that was a problem with the old setup was observability. So, we had a lot
of content being delivered, a lot of customers, and we could never really know what was going
on in our system. So, we had, of course, as network people, you know, you have a lot
of information from other parts of the system, like, you know, how the network is behaving,
but we didn't know exactly what was going on for the customer as a consumer of video
accessing that content. So, observability on the -- the video delivery layer was missing.
Resilience was also kind of a problem. It worked well enough again, but it was not ideal.
So, when things go wrong, as they always do, it wasn't very intelligent dealing with a
sort of failure. So, that was the point where we wanted to make things better. And then
we had the more special parts of it that deal with our scaling of the system. So, our traffic
is very spiky, and it's also very power law distributed. So, we need some sort of
intelligence to deal with that. This is a little bit of a graphical idea of what I'm
talking about. So, we have on this left side systems that can, from one second to the other,
we have, like, really high peaks and interactivity from customers. On the other side, we have,
for instance, customers are watching one thing, and the next second, basically, all customers
migrate to a different channel because Taggle's show ended and Taggle began. So, you have a
very small window of time where a lot of traffic shifts around and changes. So, the system
has to be able to deal with that in an intelligent fashion. All right. So, let's try the CDN.
And now I present you the very first AI generated image on the stock, a map of Germany, which
is surprisingly successful for an AI generated map. Don't ask me what the lines are about.
I have no idea. So, yeah. That's like the context of what we had as some pops around
Germany. We decided to build it with Go. Again, I'm a Gofer, so it's easy for me to say that
I decided a bit of a Go. You maybe would have come to other conclusions depending on what
your team setup is. For us, it felt like the right tool for the job. So, you have these
pops spread around Germany. We have to deal with around six terabits per second of peak
traffic. And we wanted to have -- this is the baseline that we had to match. We had to have,
like, 50 milliseconds RTT to 90% of our customers. You may ask why 90%, it's kind of a weird
low number. But you have to think that a lot of our customers are a significant portion
of our customers coming in through mobile networks and stuff. So, that's a part of our
customers that we kind of know that we don't have to target them specifically. They have
other expectations of latency, delay, and whatever. So, they have -- they're treated
slightly different. So, that's why the number is relatively low for the 90%. And on top
of that, there's, like, a control plane that lives on our hyperscaler of choice, that lives
around this city end that's not running on the pops, on the point of presence. So, what
do we have? Again, slide overview of streaming works for those of you that never take a closer
look into it. This is basically what a video stream looks like. It's that ingesting, the
little satellite dish is pushing content into a system that builds these video segments.
So, these are the files that are being downloaded via HTTP. Relatively simple. You have a live
ad. So, basically, the latest segment that has been created up to the point, to any specific
point in time, and a little bit behind that, you have the actual player play head where
the player is actually playing content. And the segments in between that is, like, the
buffer that you have locally, right? And this is a single channel. So, if you have people
watching Tatort, they're all watching this same stream of segments, right? The content
is the same, so everybody's accessing the same stream of segments. Most clients, most
people are, in our case, at least, living there in the live ad. So, they're very close
to it. They're watching live television. This is a wave breaking on our city end. It's
like people accessing the live content. There's a low -- it implies a sort of a low cash
lifetime, right? If people are watching the live content, you can expect that an old segment
is not as important for you or for your network as the one that has just been created. This
is like the hot spot of your network. This means -- this also means that you should probably
try to put -- we decided to put this on memory because it has a big churn. It doesn't make
sense to put it on disk if a couple of seconds later is going to be relevant anyway or have
a lower relevance. So, we try to put it on memory. But that implies in turn that we can't
just, you know, naively put all the content into all the nodes and spread things around
and go, okay, just shoot 200 engine Xs in front of it and let's be happy about it. Doesn't
quite work. So, the first thing that we have to start thinking about when building this
city end is how do we deal with the individual nodes? This is a schematic of how you should
think of the distributing content into nodes. What are the constraints that we have? We
have bandwidth so each node has a certain fixed bandwidth. In our case, we're dealing -- right
now the current generation is 100 gigs, nicks. They could go faster but, you know, dealing
with blast radius, so that's the sweet spot that we are right now. This is like the horizontal
skating of the node, so how much -- how many nodes do you need for a channel? I think the
example of -- for the German community here, a lot of people watch that, so you obviously
need to put that on more nodes, you need to scale that around a bit. That's the one constraint
you have. The other constraint is memory. So, you can't just put, as we had in the slide
before, everything on the same node, so you have to decide which content goes into which
node. For those of you that remember university courses, this is kind of a bin packing problem
or linear optimization problem that you have to deal with here. And then there's the third
constraint is that you have to decide how to scale this thing, how to spread the content
around, and you have to avoid the two constraints before, and also avoid that all your traffic
or a significant part of your traffic is on a single node, so that if that one node goes
down 50% of your customers are sad. Right? So, this is what we have to -- the constraints
that we have in this -- in this space. And this picture represents a bit of a pathological
case, right? You have, like for instance, the one node on the left, you see that IID needs
more traffic than a single node, so you have to spread around two nodes. But the node on
the left is underutilized when you're thinking about the cache, right? So, this is not ideal
scenario. The one on the right, on the other hand, you have channels that are not filling
up the bandwidth, but are filling up the cache, and you also have like a channel that is barely
watching there, but is still taking off cache, right? And this is an important realization
because as soon as you have one customer accessing a stream on a specific node, you're using
off cache and you're potentially evicting content out of that node and causing issues
for other customers to also on that node. So, it's just to visualize kind of the problem
space here on the node level. But, okay, with this kind of setup, you kind of solve the
problem, okay, how to distribute content on this network. Then you have to decide how
to scale it on the next level. So, what is -- the next level is external traffic. So,
you have customers coming to your CDN, and where should you send them? They have a lot
of pops in there. Again, the little vintage television there. And the control plane that
we mentioned earlier knows a lot of things about our infrastructure. It knows, for instance,
the near-live peer interpolation that we have. So, it knows, through B&B, that you have
on this one pop, we're paired with start to be like a so-and-so. And the customer is coming
from that one. So, you know, say, that's probably the best place to put it there. And
it also knows that we have maybe better peering capacity with that. So, on this one pop and
not any other one, so we take the closest or slash best pop by peering and capacity. Try
to distribute it that way so that we're -- that our peering are loaded as evenly as possible
and the customer has the lowest latency as possible. But if you think back to the other
slide about distributing content on nodes, you know that if you have a lot of content,
you're going to end up in situations where you can't put the one little channel that
is watched by 10 people in a whole country in all pops. So, we also have the case that
you may land in the wrong pop and then we have to transmit the traffic on our back bone
and send it back out through some other pop. It's not ideal, but it's our choice to do
it this way because we can have a little bit more eyes on what's going on and have a little
bit more control over the path that our traffic takes until it reaches the end customer, right?
So, if it just sent it to some overflow, it would potentially have a longer path that
we don't know, we have no way of knowing what's going on over there. So, we decided to pass
it over our network. Okay, so now we kind of solve the issue of incoming traffic and we
also have the issue of internal traffic. This little thing describes the issue that the
ingest pops. So, the little antenna sign we saw at the beginning where the actual content
gets delivered into our system, it is separate from the CDN pops because you have different
constraints, right? So, CDN pops to be close to the ISPs, the ingest needs to be closer
to the content providers which doesn't always overlap and it's easier to keep them separated
in a lot of reasons for that, practical reasons for that, but you end up with the problem
that you, okay, then you have to internally get all the content from a single place.
When you scale your traffic, that means that you get more nodes and if you don't think
about it, if you just put engine boxes in front of it, you end up hammering your origin
systems behind that and those systems and you also increase the cross-pop traffic and
those systems aren't as easy to scale, they're not as easy to scale horizontally as a CDN
is. So, you have to find a way to scale the upper part without significantly impacting
the lower one. And what we did is a multi-layer caching hierarchy in this CDN stack that deals
with this, exactly with this question, right? So, you see this in this little schematic that
a customer watching IOD and one node is actually getting it from a different node on the same
pop or a different pop, but trying to get it, trying to save the parts of the system that
are not as easy to scale from getting that load. All right, cool. So, we scaled the node,
we scaled the internal traffic, we hope we did. So, will it blend? To answer that, we have
to verify what we did. And to verify what we did, how can we know it is actually working?
We go back to our favorite monitoring tool of choice, for medias, I hope you guys use
it as well. There was a lot of state that was difficult to see before that suddenly pops
up and is visible because now it's super easy for us to add more metrics and to get it every
step of the way specifically targeted into video streaming, we can know, okay, this is
the content we're interested in, for instance, where are our customers in this time stream
of live linear content? And this is just mirrors or confirms what I talked about before that
a lot of our customers is at the live edge. And we have a long tail of people watching
stuff that is older, but a lot of it is just the live edge. Most people just like to zap
around and stay on the live edge. But this is super cool, but it's kind of basic, right?
It's -- we love it, but it's basic. Now I have to do a little digression and I hope I'm
good on time. Yeah, I can't -- good on time. And I have to talk about CMCD, our Lord and
Savior CMCD. I don't think anyone heard about this before. You can try the show hands.
Did anyone heard about CMCD before? Yes, one hand, my boss. Great. This is a standard
for player state reporting. So basically this is telemetry standard for video, specifically
for video, so for media content. The name is absurd, but anyway. This is for stuff like
this is the -- for the player to report to the CDN. This is the quality I want to play.
This is surprisingly difficult information to know about or to derive just from CDN traffic
because you don't know what the player -- like you don't know if the player has this small
screen, right? You know that you have super high quality content and you know that the
player may be accessing lower quality content, but you don't know if he wanted to do that.
So with CMCD, you suddenly know this sort of thing. Or I just had a stream saw. You
can try to derive that from bare CDN logs, but you're only seeing one side of the story.
And with CMCD, the client is telling you, hey, I just had one, right? So I had to pause
for two seconds or whatever. Or I needed six seconds to even start playing, right? It's
a super important information for us. If you're doing live TV, you know the drill, like you're
zapping around, and you don't want to spend five seconds just looking at a circle until
your TV starts to show something, right? And this is also super easy because it's piggybacked
on HTTP. This is also a very simple schematic thing because the actual requests are super
long and super cryptic names, but the basic is just like when the client requests something,
it's just sends on the query string or an HTTP header information that he has. And there's a
lot of, on the version one of the standard, there's a lot of information that can send.
For instance, on this case, MSD is a real parameter that gets sent. It's the last question there.
So how many seconds did I need to actually start playing the content? Super simple, super effective.
There's a typo there because it should be segment two, not segment one, my mistake.
Yeah, but as it's super simple, it also has a few blind spots, right? Like if a client just dies
suddenly, you're not going to get the last request, so you may add some tail end of information
missing. There's some corner cases where you get not a perfect picture, but it's a definite
improvement on just getting city end logs. And also, super magic, you can do custom telemetry on this.
It's kind of obvious that it can do this, just sending some arbitrary stuff with their request,
but it's important for us because it means that players, so the people that are writing
actual video player code, they have a standard upon which they can work on and it starts from the
get go that they think about these sort of problems, like what sort of custom telemetry
the users of my player want to implement. And for us, it's stuff like Wi-Fi signal info or CPU info.
And this gives us a lot more than just network monitoring. It gives us information, for instance,
an ISP may be having issues, right? So you have rebuffering by ASN, rebuffering is like the little
stall that you get on your video player, right? If you sit a little circle of doom, you have a
rebuffer event, and that's what we can now see aggregated overall ASN's that we peer with.
Or the one that I also talked about before, how many seconds did it start between clicking the
button on my remote and actually seeing video, which is a pretty good thing over here. It looks
half a second to a second. Or also interesting, the Wi-Fi signal strength on our clients.
But this is all aggregated, right? This is very aggregated information. So
it helps a lot, but it's still not ideal. So how can you go further? Enter Clickhouse.
You can go with any tool or choice. I just mentioned Clickhouse because I happen to be very
satisfied with it, so I'm doing a little bit of free advertisement for them. There are other
tools that do the job, but this is the one that we went with. So what do we actually do with it?
This is a database. This is a column-based database you used often for time,
timeline databases. There's a better name for it. It escapes you now.
And what we do with it is you collect telemetry on all and every single request
that lands on Earth, CDN, and we send it to Clickhouse.
That's a lot of information. For instance, for every single HTTP request,
we gather TCP-level information and we have like RTT information for every single request.
And what you see here is a whole stream. Someone actually watching television, you can accompany
them through their voyage, watching this stream, and seeing how the RTT behaves along this stream.
So this is drilling down pretty nicely. Or, for instance, or also mentioned this slide before,
Wi-Fi signal. Now we can suddenly actually correlate Wi-Fi issues in our customers with
network issues. And we can easily tell, okay, our customers are having it. It is a common thing
that they have Wi-Fi issues. Is it a common thing that Wi-Fi issues cause? RTT issues and
video quality issues. So we suddenly, it opens a lot of doors, right? So with this, we can do
super intelligent stuff. We can assist our clients on configuring how they, or the players,
how they configure their streams. For instance, players are super intelligent when it comes to
short-term decisions, right? You're walking around with your mobile phone and watching YouTube.
If you go into a cavern, it just kind of tries to adapt. But it doesn't have a long story of it.
So if you're at home and we know that you have a poor connection, we're not going to even start
to play on a higher quality. We know already that you may be kind of limited so that your
overall experience is better. So we do also do quality of experience-based monitoring. We can
also help customers support a lot. So this opened the door to a lot of different stuff
that is possible now that wasn't before. So mission accomplished.
But I can tell you what our key takeaways were. I hope I can also inspire you to have some takeaways
on this on this talk. For us, it confirmed the idea that Go was a good pick for us because it
landed on this very nice middle layer between too low level to high level.
There's one big thing missing on that is a direct consequence of this decision.
You can come talk to us later if you want to complain a bit about that. But in all and all,
we're very satisfied with it. The fact that we can add metrics to it and easily and do it basically
every week, I think, at some new metric to get some new part of the system under the microscope
that we hadn't before, help the development and help validate what we were doing during the whole
process. Keeping it simple doesn't mean the code. The code base is probably one of the most
complex ones that we have in our company, but it's the decisions of trying to keep the failure
scenario simple. If something goes wrong again, back to the first slides, if something breaks,
just keep it easy so that you can reason about it. It was a very, very good decision
considering the very few problems that we have after we deployed the system.
The last one that is missing there is just to go over it again to limitary,
to limitary all the things. If you can't even get a chance to put more stuff, I think I'm probably
preaching to the choir, but you know, put more visibility into all parts of your stack whenever
you can. And with that, that's all I have for you, if you have any questions.
Thank you, Leo, for your presentations. We've got two minutes for questions. Are there any
questions in the room, or do we have questions from the internet?
Patrick was not kidding. I only see light.
No, I don't see it. So thank you. Oh, there's one question. Oh, yeah.
Freddy from minute seven. Can you go back a few slides to the
both right ASN? You mean this one? Yeah, rebuffering by ASN traffic. I mean, just publish the numbers
of all the ISPs with these graphs, and then you have a perfect quality of the ISP. So this is my
suggestion. Yeah. It's a bit difficult to do there without stepping on some toes, but yes.
Maybe there are some toes which are asking to be stepped on. Yes. That's up to you.
So thank you. Thank you all.
