API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93153
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-78857-th3-flock-of-bird-s
Title: Th3 Flock of Bird s

(upbeat music)
- Next speaker will be Marcel Fest.
He's talking about the flock of birds.
Marcel volunteers for self-net EV
and he bringing the internet to students in Stuttgart.
And during working hours,
he incorporates proper networking concepts
into the cloud native world to fulfil the basic requirements of Deutsche Taylor O'Romme's
Kubernetes platform, this shift.
Marcel, you have the stage.
Hi, as you heard, I'm Marcel.
I'm here privately, so not for my company.
I just was interested in Bert because it just got a new release this year, version 3.
So that's what I did.
And that's me.
I live in Bizur, it's not far away from Essen.
I drink coffee and do casual cycling, so I was here yesterday with my bike, do snowboarding
and I got a new member in my family, got a dog last year.
So yeah, I know I need to click again, sorry, there's the dog.
Let's go on.
It's the first, a little bit of history with me and Bert.
So I was born in 1996, Bert was not existing, Bert started a little bit later.
So it had its initial commit in 1998, around 1998 in the beginning.
And then two years later, version 1.0 was released.
I was still in pre-schooling.
I took part in kindergarten when the initial commit happened, so it was not in touch with
Bert at all.
And then I got Edetsean, so I got into schooling.
And even Bert still stayed on version 1.0, so nothing happened there.
Then during my middle school, there was also not happening much, but then in 2009, around
my six class, seven classes started again with releases, and then each year we got a
new release like 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4.
Still I was not into Bert, still schooling, even didn't know what networking is.
And then in 2013, I got into upper school, and there was one release, and then I started
studying, and there I started itself at EV, and version 1.6 was released, and that was
the first version I came in touch with Bert.
I think it was 1.6.1, so it was not the initial release, but the bug fix release.
And at the end of my study, I even migrated to version 2, which was a huge conflict migration,
as you all know.
And then when I started working, there was the final one release in 2019, and now fast
forward to 2025, we have now released a 3, and even a very, very huge version 2, which
has a lot of support of different features.
Now we have these different versions.
I already started with version 1, like version 1 has two processes.
One can do IPv4, one, two, there's IPv6, there are some RFCs implemented, a day, more,
and just put some here, and there are a lot of things added into version 1, but it was
still one demon, one routing protocol, and one neighbor, and the BGP stack.
I only looked at the BGP stack of Bert.
And then in version 2, it changed.
We got one event loop, and you can configure both address families there.
And it got a huge amount of features, even VPN support, and a huge amount of development
happened in version 2.
This version was also the one I implemented most of the time when I used it, and the huge
improvement was a PKE.
I think there were a lot of talks around that in the last years.
And then we got version 3, which introduced multithwearing, because in version 2, there
was only one single event loop, doing all the stuff, all neighbors, and everything.
And if you need to have separation of concerns, you saw that in the earlier talk, you need
to have two instances.
If one dies, then the other one can take over.
In version 3, they changed it, they did multi-thread execution, and they shuffled a lot of stuff
inside.
So from outside, it looks still like version 2 from a config interface.
But in the inside, they changed a lot.
And I thought, maybe I can try and check if the conveyance changed with different routers
in the different Bert versions.
So what I did was I used this nice BNG blaster.
I think there was a talk at the Enoch 15.
And this BNG blaster can produce BGP update messages and generate traffic for all the routes.
So you can send in traffic, and then toggle the routing table of the router you are testing.
So I put Bert here, the different versions.
And then you have receiving routers on the other end, where you can -- so what I did here
is send a traffic to RX1, and then toggle back to RX2, drop the routes of RX2, and then
look at the three conversion times, which are on the lower end.
I didn't invent everything on my own, so it's based on Christian Giese's work from Artie
Brick and the BNG blaster project.
If you're interested, the benchmark test bit from this talk is on GitHub and the BNG blaster
project, I was sitting here, so if you look at the slides, you can check that out.
Next thing -- so here's the convergence of version 1.6 to 8.
Unfortunately, I wasn't able to see huge differences in the Bert versions, so the convergence
of 1.6 to 8 was similar to 2.17 to.
And also similar to 3.14, I don't know why the 7 seconds there happened.
I was not able to see any improvements there on the convergence times.
Maybe it's possible if you have more neighbors, so that was some suggestion from someone here
on the conference.
Maybe if you have 15 neighbors in parallel and do a lot of route, maybe then you can see
different convergence times between version 1, 2, and 3, but unfortunately I was not able
to reproduce it, so you can choose wisely what version you like, and all of them convert
in a similar time.
Yeah, that's my talk, thank you.
Thank you, Marcel.
We do have time for one or two short questions.
Are there any questions?
Anything online?
All right, thank you, Marcel.
Thank you.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
