API URL: https://media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93239
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-79083-baremetal-server-management-with-redfish
Title: Baremetal Server Management with Redfish

(upbeat music)
- Okay, so our next lightning talk series
starts with Matthias Hark.
He's the bare metal enthusiast and co-founder
of a hero tech providing open source cloud platforms
to their customers.
And today we will learn about bare metal management
with Redfish.
- Thank you.
Yes, hello, I'm a TS, I'm founder and CEO of Verutac.
I have a long history in Unix-Linux stuff
and not that much network stuff that most of you
probably have, yeah. (laughs)
But always look from the server side of the network
and keep keen in bringing open source to enterprises
and I meditate every morning and I say, yeah,
if everyone would do that on his own will,
I think you would have peace on world, yeah, but we'll see.
So, why did we come into this bare metal provisioning
with Redfish?
So first we wanted to have Kubernetes and bare metal
in order to run open stack there
with Kubernetes operators.
And we wanted to have completely automatic provisioning
of the bare metal service with operating system
Kubernetes on it.
We wanted to have the firmware updates
automatically done from some engine
and also do the firmware settings.
And we want to have a free web networking on the host.
So we have a FR demon running on the host,
peering with the leaf switches
and propagating the routes there.
We made some decisions.
They said, okay, let's use open source
as much as possible.
So we did not want to reinvent the wheel
or do things on our own when it's not necessary.
So this is Pragma, we live in our company.
We wanted to use existing tools.
So this was KVUs, Kubernetes, of course.
And then we found a tool upstream,
which is called Metacute.
It's basically in Kubernetes operator,
which has open stack ironic standalone inside.
And this ironic instance is managing the bare metal service
and it's ironic, it's very good in doing that.
So re-implementing all the stuff
which is in there would have been very, very much work.
And unknowns, which are already solved by ironic,
you would have to solve by your own on your own.
And this is something we did not want to do.
So that's why we decided for this path.
And we decided to use Redfish rather than AIPMI
because it's decided a newer protocol
and has advantages.
So it has more features, basically.
And I'm excited you will see what we are doing there.
And AIPMI is so-called deprecated.
It has security leaks here and there.
And so we said, okay, let's go for the Redfish way.
And yeah, so on this slide you see the data flow
when you do a inspect with ironic with a server.
So the red arrows, you see the redfish calls.
So, but let's go from top to bottomed.
So a user adds a bare metal host to the Kubernetes
which is handed by the bare metal operator.
It tells the ironic server here.
This is a new node.
Please check if you can access it.
The ironic says, okay, let's check.
Is there other credentials valid?
And if everything is fine, information goes back.
Afterwards, it started inspection.
And for this inspection, for the start of the inspection,
ironic can create a customized ISO image
for booting the servers.
This helps to bring the layer three networking configuration
for the first boot, for the inspection boot of the server.
So you be basically at their networking information.
So ASN numbers, BGP secrets, whatever is needed,
for the connecting to the network.
And this ISO image is pushed to the ironic HTTP server.
So this has several components in the ironic there.
Then we have this, then ironic turns off the server
to be sure we have a clean state.
Then it mounts this prepared ISO EPA image.
EPA stands for ironic Python agent.
We are redfish to the BMC.
And this BMC now has to pull this ESO
from the HTTP server.
And basically this is already the first point
where you get nice, interesting things.
If the implementation of the BMC,
then the boot device is set.
We are redfish and the server is turned on.
And if everything goes right,
you boot the server with this ISO.
And you don't need the data fabric of the server first
until this point to spin it up and to make an inspection.
Only, and then you see in the last lane line,
then this RAM disk image is booted
and it inspects the hardware and sends back this image
to this data which was gathered to the ironic server.
And after that you can handle it
and you can say, okay, what do I want to do
if the server I want to have it as a Kubernetes control plane
or whatever, and you can provision it
and then the next flow goes on.
This is just an inspection.
And you already see there are just a few redfish calls
which should work out of the box for every BMC.
But this is not the case here.
So for AMI implemented, AMI implemented BMCs,
you can only boot from Samba or Sifs or NFS for example,
which is not covered by ironic for example,
there's only HTTP boot possible and so on.
Then we want to have some,
want to do some other management with the BMC as well.
So from simple stuff like you have an initial credential
for a BMC, you want to set a password
to change the password, sometimes works,
sometimes not from the before the BMCs,
which is really basic stuff in my opinion.
And set a static network configuration, same experience.
Yeah, you have at the beginning you have a DHCP configuration
on the BMC, you want to switch to a static one.
It says, okay, everything is fine,
but it does not set the configuration.
Beers parameters works well, for example,
with super micro but other implementations, yeah, so, so.
And updating BMC and BIOS is interesting as so.
So what is the total sum up for us?
So we have we got documentations from the vendors,
which say, okay, this should work, this works like this,
this endpoint is there in redfish,
but these features are not working.
So this is, it's just documented, but it's not working.
So in a form project, we had a lot to work
with the Thomas grand dies.
They are very close to the hardware vendor
and they were able to fix the stuff, yeah, so, but,
if you are, for example, using a Dell or whatever,
yeah, you're just a number, yeah, so this is really hard.
And yeah, and getting okay means nothing, yeah,
so this is really, you get an okay from the redfish API
and use, but it does not work, it does not do anything.
Firmware updates, we had really less BMC,
so we had to turn off the servers and flash them.
We are worked cable, yeah, again, so this was really hard, yeah.
And this interaction with firmware vendors
is not always possible, yeah, so we would love
to give feedback to these vendors and,
but if you are just a consumer,
you are not in the way to, yeah, to interact with Dell or HP
or something and to give this constructive feedback there.
And yeah, and I always say, yeah,
this redfish specification is just treated as an idea
by most hardware vendors, yeah, they say, okay,
we have this tree for us and we do it on our way
because maybe we know it better and yeah,
that's a little bit annoying for if you do automation, yeah,
so because you want to treat the servers all in one.
But there is light on the horizon, yeah,
so we, there is an open BMC implementation,
there is core boot and this implementation,
we had the luck to have them in hand already
and this is different, it works, it just works, yeah,
so it's so, I say, it's possible and,
but we have to take care because AI for example
is also capturing this open BMC
and they do their own open BMC implementation,
which is of course different.
And yeah, so if you have the opportunity to talk
to any hardware vendor, if you are asked,
what would you prefer, tell them open BMC
from the upstream project and contribute
to the upstream project, this helps everyone at the end,
I think, and yeah, that's it.
Thank you.
(audience applauds)
- Thank you very much, yeah, we are on top of the hour
so we don't have time for questions, sorry,
but I'm sure people can find you in the break.
- Yeah, of course.
(audience applauds)
