API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93142
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-78820-evpn-for-the-rest-of-us-what-happens-when-software-people-try-to-use-evpn
Title: EVPN for the rest of us – what happens when software people try to use EVPN

(upbeat music)
- First speaker today is Molly Miller.
Molly is a systems engineer at Flying Circus
in the net operations where she works
in the platform team on data center networking.
Please welcome Molly and enjoy the talk.
(audience clapping)
Okay, so as well as Guy said, I'm from Flying Circus.
I'm going to talk a bit about what happens when solved
for people who try to use EVPN.
So a bit of quick background on Flying Circus and me.
So at Flying Circus we do manage hosting
for bespoke and complex and business critical applications.
The Pithy marketing line is DevOps as a service
and what that means is we take over
operational responsibility for customer applications
for customers who aren't able to
or don't want to do this themselves.
Our founders are both software engineers by background
with a lot of experience in open source
and this is a very big influence on our methods and processes.
I'm a systems engineer.
I've been at Flying Circus for two years now
and my focus on the platform
and infrastructure team is data center networking
and in particular the EVPN migration we've done.
So we run our applications in VMs, we do VMs
and each VM has two network interfaces.
There's a front-end network for unfiltered access
to the public internet and then there's a services network
which is very heavily filtered
and for application backend traffic
and some non-public functions like monitoring.
And there's some other networks like out-of-band management
or a self-cluster which aren't shown in this diagram
which also are managed separately.
These are all shared layer two networks
which are bridged by the hypervisor
so the VMs all see each other.
So how does this look physically in the data center?
Well, before EVPN this is how it looks.
Each network had its own physically separate infrastructure
so we have separate switches
for every logical network here
and every server has a separate port on the back
for every network it needs to connect to.
This has the advantage that the switch config is very simple
and if one dies we can just swap it out and replace it.
Easy as that.
But there were some pain points with this switch.
We're starting to be a source of friction
and well, we wanted to do something better.
In particular, we don't have any active redundancy
so if a switch fails that means we have a hard outage
and we need to send in the remote hands
to swap over the switch and move all the connections over.
It's bit of a hassle.
It also has very per scaling properties.
If we want to add new networks
then we need to go and buy a bunch of network cars
and a bunch of cables and more switches
and the capital cost is very big.
And we don't really have a good story
for per tenant isolation.
These are all shared L2s
and whilst we do run a managed firewall in every VM
this is really a workaround
and we don't consider ideal.
So we wanted to build something better
to address these limitations
and we wound up going with something based on EVPN.
And this looks like this.
So this is a rooted layer three underlay
with redundant connections
between the hypervisors and the switches
and the routing is all done with BGP, IPv4 unit cost.
We then run a VX line overly on top of this
and we terminate the VX lines directly on the hypervisors.
So these are Linux servers
which have a bridge interface on them
which the VX line is plugged into.
And every old layer two network
which we used to have is now a VX line.
So we have the front end and services networks
which are these shared VX lines.
Some of the set functions are in there
out of band are still separate because it's out of band.
And we've got some nice things out of this.
There were some benefits
in implementing the network this way.
We've reduced the number of cables per server
which is good for the cable salad management.
And adding new networks
if we ever have new functions
that we want to add to the network
is just a matter of configuration.
We just updated configuration fell
and it all happens to work.
This is also all based on open standards.
We have a bit of a checker reputation
when it comes to buying switches from a vendor
which then gets bought out six months later.
And then in some cases the prices go absolutely insane
and we can't afford them anymore.
And we're a bit tired of that
and we'd like if this didn't happen anymore.
And whilst we don't really have pertinent isolation
we're still running Big Share to L2s but virtualize.
But we now have a basis on which we can build
this per tenant isolation
that we want to have in the future.
But we can build all this
nation network in the green field.
But the real party trick is in the migration
from the old world to the new world.
So in terms of time scale
the initial R&D and lab work
lasted from September 23 to February 24.
And then at that point we switched modes
pulled in some other colleagues to do
all the rest of the integration work
and to get it ready to deploy to production.
And in May 2094 we then did a production rollout
in the space of a week.
And a lot of the development work
and development effort that went into this
is making the rollout go smoothly.
A lot of the effort was in the preparation here.
There's this long tail of little things
which we have to take care of
when we're doing this whole migration.
So we have one week.
We have not quite 50 servers to migrate.
So from that we can calculate a hard limit
on the amount of time we have for each server,
especially if you want to do a stage incremental rollout.
We established that rebooting every server
is actually too slow.
There is me and one colleague of mine
in the data center and between the both of us
working on this.
If we have to wait for the server to reboot
which can take five to 10 minutes
depending on the hardware,
then we've run out of our time box
and we don't have any buffer at the end.
So we put a lot of effort into ensuring
that we can get robust reconfiguration online
without rebooting even for complex network changes.
And we have our centralized control plane,
our control panel which has all the configuration
which is then pushed out to all of our machines.
And the click path there was sub-optimal.
It was a lot of clicking around
but this is software we've developed ourselves.
So we just implemented a magic button
and you click the magic button,
say yes on the next form
and then the network is converted to
this EVP and VX line set up.
And that made things go a lot more smoothly.
Also the actual process in terms of physical data center hardware,
we wound up in this halfway house
set up for performing the migration.
So on one of the VX line switches,
we terminated the VX lines directly on the switch
which are otherwise only terminated on the hypervisors
and then broke out the VX line there
and bridge it to the old layer two devices.
And then we could incrementally move every host over
so we can drain the traffic off of each host,
live migrate the VMs elsewhere,
we can then fix all the cabling,
we can update the config,
plug it all back in, test it, it works
and then put the VMs or whatever other workload back on there.
And with that we can then do every host incrementally.
And there's a couple of little things in the background here.
We had this wonderful spreadsheet
with a very detailed checklist for every server,
so like 50 columns and some 20 rows each
with every single step in detail.
And well, it was mostly smooth sailing.
For the most part, it went very well.
There is an asterisk here
because it wasn't totally zero down time.
There were one or two false moves and some unexpected issues.
There was a cable which got plugged into the wrong port
and the switch in the middle of the migration process.
And there was one nasty problem
with a faulty cable dropping only large packets.
Yeah.
So there were no major outages though
and we didn't have our hands forced
into any planned customer downtime.
And well, I have here some pictures
of the cable-style-led dith.
And...
(audience applauds)
(audience applauds)
And on the left, you can't even see where the switches are
'cause there's just so many cables there.
I do have to point out
that this has grown historically over several years.
But now that we have physical redundancy,
if you want to clean the cabling up,
we can just pull a cable and it doesn't matter.
It's great.
So that's the story of how we got to where we are.
And there's a couple of technical points
which I'd like to discuss as well.
So first of all, switch port management philosophy.
Flag Circus is a netbox-free zone.
We don't use netbox.
Now, part of this is that we have
our own configuration database application.
We're a bunch of software people.
We wrote the software during the integration.
So a lot of the features, which I personally see
a lot of other organizations using netbox for,
tracking which server is in which rack,
with which ports and which VLANs,
we just implemented all ourselves
because we have in-house know-how to do that.
But another part of this is
that we don't believe in fixed switch port assignments.
We'd like switch configuration to be as uniform as possible.
So you can just plug a server into the switch
on any free port and it'll just work.
This is also very remote, hands-friendly.
Our main data center is just up the road in Oberhausen,
but our main office is in Halizala,
all the way in Saxon-Anhal.
So we're not in the DC very often.
And having this nice, simple switch config
makes it really easy for the remote house
to work on this on our behalf.
So that's that for switch ports.
And then there's the debugging in the lab.
So when we were R&Ding this in the lab,
the packets weren't flowing where they were meant to be flowing
and we had to work out what exactly was going on
with all of this VX LAN nonsense.
And at the time, we were trying to get TCP DOM to do this for us
because we're a bunch of Unix nerds,
so we want to trace packets.
The first thing we type is sudo TCP DOM.
And so you can type sudo TCP DOM
with the port number for VX LAN, I hope I got that right.
And then grep for MAC address.
And this works, but it's a little bit cumbersome.
You can't filter watts inside the VX LAN packets.
And once you start pushing traffic over this
from multiple sources, that gets a little bit
a little bit cumbersome.
And sure, Wireshark can do this,
but on the CLI that's really fiddly.
And I happened to be reading through the TCP DOM
manual page, or rather the libPCAP manual page.
And I found that a function for examining
the contents of encapsulated packets already exists
for Janif.
I'm not sure I've ever heard of anyone actually using Janif,
but the functionality is all there
and already half implemented.
So in a fit of frustration, I spent three hours
one afternoon implementing this.
So you can now say TCP DOM with your interface,
VX LAN and, and then everything after the end,
it is matched on the encapsulated packet.
And I tossed that upstream and it got merged.
So everyone else can enjoy this as well now.
We like open source.
(audience applauding)
I do have another PR against TCP DOM,
which has been setting open for a year
and no one's merged it yet.
So if anyone knows about TCP DOM development
and can get me in contact with the right people,
that will be great.
So after we debugged it, we had to get it all working
and part of that in our network is the rotors.
So we run an active standby rotor pair in every location.
We don't have any full active for some historical reasons
which might be called Stateful NAT,
but we use Bird for BGP announcements to upstreams
and this is something we brought from the old network.
And part of the failover automation,
so if one router becomes unhealthy
or it just needs to do a reboot for a kernel update,
this then fails over automatically,
attributes on the routes are updated
and then that all works fine.
But we need to use FRR for the EVP and VX and features.
And so I spent a long time spending on this.
Do we keep Bird on the routers?
Do we implement all this integration for FRR?
And then a colleague came along and said,
"Why not both? Why don't we just use both?"
And yeah, we run Bird and FRR.
This is output I grabbed from a router yesterday.
And the benefit of hindsight,
this actually works really well for us
because now we have separation of concerns.
So Bird is primarily responsible
for everything to the outside world
and FRR is responsible for everything
to our inside world.
And that's actually really nice to have sometimes.
And as a quick aside,
we actually have a second Bird in a sense on the routers
'cause there's some other functions which came along
which I never got around to integrating
into the existing configuration.
So I've worked out how to get two Bird and Sisters
and running on the same machine
and turns out this works as well.
And that's pretty cool.
So speaking of routing demons,
we need to talk about FRR, unfortunately.
FRR is currently the only usable implementation
of EVP and VX LAN on Linux.
Now, we're self-for-people
and we are aware in the broad abstract
that software has bugs.
FRR is no exception here.
FRR does have some bugs because it's software.
Unfortunately, when it's network software
sitting at the very basis of everything we build upon,
those bugs can have a very big blast radius.
Some are definitely worse than others.
So the quick version of EVP and,
for folks who maybe don't know too much about it,
is it's essentially BGP for MAC addresses.
There's this thing called the Type 2 root
which says this MAC address is reachable over here.
And this is how you then build up a shared layer two network
by originating and announcing all these routes
to everyone in a big full mesh
or through switches or whatever topology you want.
Optionally, you can also put IP addresses in these routes,
which then gives you a MAC IP mapping.
So the neighbor table on Linux are an NDP.
And FRR will generate and consume these routes.
So if it gets a MAC IP or if it gets a Type 2 root, rather,
with a MAC IP mapping in it,
it will then manage this in the kernel neighbor table.
There's a slight problem that,
well, we have these active standby router pair
and there's a floating gateway address involved.
And we run into this extremely frustrating problem
that sometimes when a failover happens,
the route saying the mapping of the router
of the floating gateway address to this router MAC address
gets stuck.
And this then means that every server in our data center
has an incorrect mapping for the floating gateway address
to the corresponding MAC address.
And for routing this doesn't really affect things
because the routers all have forwarding turned on anyway.
This blows up with DNS because these DNS requests
are then sent to an IP address,
which is not locally assigned in the machine
and the resolver is not listening there.
Now, as far as we can tell,
this is somewhere in the kernel network handling
and this is some crazy race condition
which I don't know the FRR internals well enough to debug.
The proximate cause, though,
is that it's something to do with neighbor table management,
somewhere in there, in that general direction.
So I came up with a very stupid solution
and that's, if I call into these two lines of code,
then FR stops managing the neighbor table.
All of our Linux machines fall back
to doing dynamic RPN-NDP discovery over the VX line fabric.
This just works, thankfully.
So we've been using FRR for a year and a half now
and it certainly works,
but really we feel more home with bird.
And it'd be nice if we could use bird for this,
but bird doesn't really have EVPN-VX line yet.
So we've been on the phone to CZNIC
who are responsible for maintaining bird.
And they've been open to collaboration,
so we're going to collaborate with CZNIC
to help finalize and test the VX-N function
at the EVPN-VX-N functionality in there.
So watch this space.
We're very excited about it
and given the complexity of EVPN,
we're also interested in having a commercially supported
alternative to FRR as well.
(audience applauds)
So some closing thoughts on all of this.
Can software people use EVPN?
Yes, of course, well, we did it.
Our network is now significantly more complex.
And one of the big changes which came with EVPN
was actually an organizational change.
We've had to change how some of the responsibility
for our infrastructure is distributed.
And now that we have more software in the picture,
there's more moving parts and more sources of outages.
There are more way things can explode.
But on the other hand, software-defined networking
is still just software, right?
And we're software people.
So we're playing on our home ground.
We knew application operations.
It just so happens that we now have
another application in our network.
So we're able to lean on a lot of the knowledge
and experience that we have with that
for operating our network as well.
And this includes things like automated testing in QA,
which is something that we think is good
because we do software and we think that
the rest of the networking industry could do that as well,
and that would be cool.
So, yeah.
That's everything I've got.
[APPLAUSE]
Thank you, Molly.
Are there any questions?
Please show your hand.
And I will come over with the microphone.
[INAUDIBLE]
All right.
I'm Robin, a great presentation.
Thank you.
So my question is, you said you're running
BERT and FRR and parallel.
How are you interfacing those?
Like, are you running separate BGP sessions?
Or how does that work?
So they're running separate BGP sessions.
So BGP talking to our upstream provider
to announce our prefixes or runs through BERT.
And FRR is what talks to our switches.
And we have these bounds to separate interfaces.
So the interfaces have different functions.
And the routing dunes are bound to those interfaces
to ensure that the routing or, well, the BGP sessions
stay on those interfaces.
All right.
Thanks.
More questions?
Oh, at the back.
Hi, Q. So you talked a lot about how things went wrong
on the Linux side of things.
But did anything weird happen with the switches?
Or did the switches mostly just work when you plugged them in?
We definitely had to spend more brain
power on the Linux side of things.
With the switches that we have, which we're using for this,
those have more or less just worked.
It hasn't been that we found any game-breaking bugs
and EVPN implementations on switches, which we've
then had to get a vendor to fix.
It's mostly being software has bugs,
which goes for the switches as well.
But most of the effort that we had to put into that
was on the Linux side.
So you would say that the vendor side on switches of EVPN
is fairly mature.
And it's a lot more polished.
It's definitely a lot more polished.
Any more questions?
Any online questions?
No online questions.
Any more questions in the room?
Oh, yeah.
This is getting exhausting.
Tom, I think you just made people very, very happy
with saying there's EVPN coming in broad.
But can you share a little bit about the timeline
or how people can test?
As far as I know, this is a work in progress,
which is nearing completion.
And we spoke to them then being sees Edneck
in the past couple of weeks.
And we happen to have a lab set up for doing routine work,
which we're hoping to give them access to,
and then things might happen something next year.
It's all still a little bit up in the air,
so I don't have anything more concrete
than that at the moment.
Thank you.
All right, any more questions?
Thank you, Molly.
