API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93154
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-78260-400g-zr-bidi-does-not-exist-it-can-t-hurt-you-or-can-it
Title: 400G ZR+ BiDi does not exist, it can't hurt you. Or can it?

(upbeat music)
- Last talk in this session block is about 400 gig Z,
or B-directional optics.
They couldn't have heard you.
And the presenters, Ariane Copen and Nicola von Taden.
Ariane is network architect at E3DNet,
and Nicola is head of network at Falscombe,
and they both from other heat area also work
on building networks for non-profit events.
Stay at your sewers.
- Okay.
- Hi everyone.
(audience applauding)
- Thank you so much.
- Good to see you.
- Thank you.
- Hi, my name is Ariane, and this is Niko,
and today we'll tell you something
about the uplink that we've built for Y 2025.
Y 2025 is this year's Dutch hacker camp.
And with a team of volunteers,
we've built a decent scale temporary ISP
that has his own ASIP space,
on-site fiber infrastructure,
and we've deployed around 60 data in close,
or those are the network pops
that we have installed across the field.
Yeah, so the Dutch hacker camps,
they've been going on for quite a while now.
So the first one was organized in 1993,
and since then, every four years,
there has been a new hacker camp organized.
This slide gives an overview of the last few hacker camps
that we've organized in the type of uplink
that we came up with.
Yeah, in the last couple of editions,
they had a nice dark fiber connection
when we were at the field in J-Volda.
And for Y 2025, we actually returned to the field
at Reismar Ombacht, which was the same field we used in 2013.
But in 2013, we actually had to install
three kilometers of fiber ourselves,
and we didn't really want to have a repeat of that.
But luckily enough there, since 2013,
there was a fiber to the home provider
that had installed fiber onto the field,
and we were able to use this fiber as a dark fiber.
Yeah, and how did we get for Y 2025
from Nick Have onto the field?
And for the folks that don't know Nick Have,
this is a data center in Amsterdam,
and it's considered, I guess,
one of the more interconnected data centers in Europe,
I would say.
And this is also where Ethan Tintra has installed,
has their equipment installed,
and this is the network that we used
for running the network on site.
We worked with surf,
and surf is the research network in the Netherlands.
They have transmission network all across the country,
and they offered us to use a,
to get an alien wave on their infrastructure,
and with that we could build a 400 gigabit co-herent link
from Nick Have to one of their customer sites,
which is in Holland, which is a school.
It's in Altmark, it's nearby the field,
but we still had to bridge a gap from there
to the fiber to the home provider,
so we had to rent a 35 kilometer dark fiber to KPN
to get there.
And from the fiber to the home provider,
it was a simplex fiber all the way onto the field.
Yeah, but the simplex does give some additional challenges,
because yeah, in the past we did 100 gig
and 200 gig for the last event,
so we wanted to do double the capacity.
So we wanted to do 400 gig over the simplex fiber,
and yeah, early on we already concluded
that we needed to use some DBWM technology
due to the distance and loss of the fiber.
There is the UK-based hacker camp EMF
for electromagnetic fields.
They deployed a solution with four times 10 gig
over DWM using simplex and eight channels,
so we kind of wanted to see if we can copy this concept.
We did some tests in the lab with
Altmark equipment, 400 gig coherent,
that's for my employer, we still had lying around
and we tried to put the receive channel on channel A
and then the transmit on channel B,
but yeah, this didn't work.
We talked to APHA about this and they said,
yeah, you have to buy another product
if you wanted to do something like this.
So we learned that with coherent technology,
these days the RX and TX frequency
always needs to be the same.
So I went on IRC and I asked around in the analog channel
and some people gave some suggestions to solve the issue.
One of them is like you could maybe use optical circulators
and there the RX and TX frequency can actually be the same.
But we didn't think this was a very good solution
because the optical circulators they have,
if there's a lot of reflection and loss on the fiber,
yeah, it might not be a very stable solution.
But yeah, then also Nico came around
and he had a somewhat cursed idea,
so which he, yeah, we talked about that in the office
and we just bought some fancy new 400 gig equipment
from smart optics and we were like, oh, that,
that shouldn't care about the idea we had.
So we can't do two different channels
but we can do more optics.
And what happens when we use one optic only for the TX side
and another optic on another channel for the RX side?
That wouldn't work in your normal router
because that router is like a, I receive light
than I'm sending, but if I don't receive light,
I don't want to push packets out of that port.
But DWDM equipment usually doesn't care about that.
There might be other equipment out there
but not the stuff we use that's like quite happy
with doing light in one direction only.
In this case, this is the smart optics
and the local fiber had a surprise.
It has had over 20 dB of loss on the 50 kilometer link
which is something you would normally expect
for 100 kilometers, a bit below or a bit above that
but the normal optics wouldn't work with that.
So I did the first testing and also incorporated
an amplifier in that.
The idea was to split up the signal from the router
before the DWDM equipment and you can see on the top left,
so these are two chassis of our smart optics device
we use for that.
The upper, the second port on the left,
you can only see a fiber on the right,
so there's light going in the optic
and on the fourth port, there's light coming out of the optic.
This was the lap setup we used
with a 40 kilometer of fiber plus added attenuators
to get roughly the loss of the KPN dark fiber we had.
And this is basically the schematic of how we built that.
Might be a bit easier to see than the previous photo.
So our provider, I carry a great first box on the left,
gets the TX port patched to one of the client parts
of the smart optics transponder
and the RX port is coming from another client port
from the smart optics transponder.
And this is only changing from the gray object
to the colored 400 gigs that are plus optic.
And from there, it's business as usual.
As you would expect, we have got our DWM mocks
like we had in England last year,
but this time we only use two channels
with 400 gig per direction.
So one channel is this direction
and the other channel is that direction for the TX.
So basically we are using twice the amount of hardware,
which was thankfully launched by my employer,
otherwise this would have been really expensive.
And I'm not sure if our other sponsors
like flex optics would ship many thousand euros worth
of optics just for a fun event.
I heard they also have sometimes, I said, ah,
this is expensive, yes, I know, thank you still.
But yeah, this is schematic.
To make it even more interesting,
our hardware there didn't use one times 400 gig,
but we used four times 100 gig break out with an MPO box.
So cabling was a lot more interesting on the top right.
This was the pop in between where we went from our
surf sponsored 400 gig career end channel
to our local loop DWM multiplex single mode,
single fiber link on the top left.
In the picture you see the MPO breakout box
for the in this case three ports,
one from Amsterdam two towards the field,
where also only every second port is patched
because one optic is doing TX
and the other optic is only RX.
Monitoring wise you can see that some graphs were a bit weird
because of course one optic isn't reporting OSNR,
it doesn't receive light, it's just sending light out.
And over there you can see the power failure we had on site
because the high voltage line failed unfortunately.
But besides that, this was running for a week
for the event we had no issues.
We will do that again.
Not sure if you want to use that for a customer.
That depends on you, it scales,
you can throw more channels on it and more money
and then you can do 800 gig or even more.
But still twice the amount of optics to get the data done.
So the bidi technically doesn't exist still,
it can hurt you or just make an event happen
with more bandwidth than needed,
but we wanted to pull that off to show that it works
and also continue the trend of delivering more bandwidth.
So we have questions.
(audience applauding)
- Thank you, we do have time for one or two questions.
Over there.
Also Flex Optics has a talk later on
on why it wouldn't work with one optic.
I heard there's some information about the frequency in there.
- Andrew Gunibak, basics.
Well, I've come across about some feature in some vendors.
They have some unidirectional mode.
So you could plug your optics probably into those devices.
Are we still?
- Oh, oh, that might have worked.
Well, this was connected to our Juniper routers.
So not sure if they would accomplish that,
but it might be worth it,
or I haven't played with the unidirectional feature,
or is it UDLD to just disable a pod
if it's unidirectional, the feature?
But yeah, that might be worth a look.
- Okay.
Thank you, Ayaan and Nicola.
