API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93138
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-81767-denog17-opening
Title: DENOG17 Opening

(upbeat music)
- Good morning and welcome to Asen.
Very happy to not see you at all, I see light.
(laughing)
- Good morning, lights.
- It's like this is the end of the tunnel.
Okay, I've got the message.
(laughing)
Wonderful.
My name is Patrick Busman.
I'm the chair of the Dinark Foundation.
I'm very happy to say hello to all of you here in Asen.
You had a choice.
Apparently, at least, that's what we're telling you
all the time when we're talking about conferences,
Dinark and all of that.
So we said you have a choice or you had a choice,
but did you really?
I mean, let's recap the last 12 months quickly
and as far as I understand, I have 10 minutes for 54 slides,
So this is going to be fast.
And your choice was to stay in Berlin.
That was an option when we said Asen,
like for the first 20 to 150 seconds,
I'm decently sure for at least the German-speaking
population who was attending this.
This is what you thought about.
(laughing)
And then we, if we're more honest,
this is what we told our families.
It's like 30 seconds later, reality kicked in
and re-realized, and this is what we're thinking about.
(laughing)
I was like, let's be honest about that, come on.
So, if you then work further and took another 90 seconds,
like you most likely ended at the Hitzel,
Asen, something you've heard about this previously,
someone has told you about a UNESCO,
but who of you knew Asen and were in Asen before?
Give me a hand, shout-out of hands.
I'm guessing that's a lot, I see a tiny bit.
Wonderful, so tiny side note to follow up on a few things.
That is not literally, that's the name of the city.
It does not mean you have to do Asen the whole day
during lunch, fair enough.
We take acknowledgement for yesterday's mishap,
we fix that, we put redundancy in place,
today is gonna be better,
we're not gonna make you hangry again.
Let's hope.
So with that, we thought we'll give you choices.
And we knew everyone would be unhappy about that.
My reasonable definition of giving choices
is if everyone is equally unhappy, we've done a good job.
That's inclusion and the definition of fairness,
to some extent.
So, when we said we're gonna do two tracks,
everyone was like, yeah, but two tracks
leads to missing one track.
So, I don't have full access anymore,
I can't see everything.
That's true, but be realistic, now you have a choice.
Before we made a choice and said,
this is what you're watching.
So, now you have two tracks that you can look at
and decide by yourself.
You also have a choice to watch roughly 80% more content
because we wanted to do a tiny small stage B,
which has like two tracks or two things per day.
It is fully sold out, you're crazy people.
And it is fully staffed with content, so that is awesome.
Thank you everyone for handing in so many presentations.
You know I also have a choice,
cat versus dog.
Not sure how the cat picture made it in here,
it's like I'm clearly 100% dog,
but you have a choice to have that 180% content
to be live and recorded.
So, you have all of that because of the amazing work
that the team here in the video studio
in two stages is doing now.
So, with that, let's quickly go through this
and have a recap of what happened since we last met.
Like we're still doing ICP2 mandate for RIR regulations,
and this is really, really German stuff
because we're talking through documents,
we're reading policies, and we're trying to introduce
how the rest of the world interacts with the RIRs
and how the internet is governed by the United Nations.
Boring.
But, kind of the foundation for nearly everything
that every one of us here is doing,
so if you haven't yet, I highly recommend you
check that out to some extent.
IGFD in Germany kicked off again.
That's the Internet Governance Forum in Germany.
That is the place for pretty much every piece
of internet legislation, every part of internet regulation
comes together and talks about general concepts.
Denmark since 2025 is part of that conversation
and part of building and creating IGF.
And then this data sovereignty thing is coming up more
and more for some reason as someone who is paid
by an American company, I'm not to talk about that further.
At the same time, the world is changing here as well.
It's like we have a changing world
of peering and interconnection models.
For those of you who haven't checked,
I recommend you talk to your neighbors.
Something happened last week, this week.
If you haven't seen it, I'm sure the floor track
can tell you, if you haven't seen that either,
we have a talk tomorrow from our friends
from Nitzbremzer, who I highly recommend
you attend and have a look at.
And then again, if you want to have more topics
to talk about, it's like we have roughly
370 billion US dollars of AI data center investment
in 2025 as far as I understand we're doing roughly
three times that in 2026, which leaves the question
for Deenark and Deenark attendance number one,
is there anything left?
Like if all the AI companies buy all the data centers
in power, will you all have data centers?
Question one to discuss.
And then a question two, is this gonna be really, really cheap
in dollar time if the bubble bursts?
So with that, a couple of topics to talk about.
The pure point that I'm trying to make here is,
there is still a critical reason
why you all should talk to each other.
And that brings me back to, you have a choice.
And we're offering you a choice.
Our conference mission here is to create a conference
that enables all of you attendees to network
and go away smarter from Deenark.
However you get to that point is up to you.
Like you can make a choice and that's what we're
recommending to do here.
And door A is the one pill, door yellow is the other pill.
Which direction ever you wanna go?
But the choice that we're proposing is, you'll be present.
Life is gonna go on outside,
life is gonna go on completely different.
Your emails will come in, you can rush out
out of every presentation and do emails and delete them.
Or you can make a choice and be present.
That is your choice, we highly recommend.
It is your decision to do with the next couple of days
what you wanna do.
And I have to be significantly faster, I was just told.
So, one data point to think about is,
we're all data driven when no one of us ever
makes no data driven decisions.
We have roughly 625 attendees here.
By a ballpark calculation that I made yesterday,
all of you have on average 16 years of work experience
if you calculate that.
That is about 10,000 years of industry experience
that all of you have access to here.
In comparison, a famous connection platform
that also has a library for training and internet knowledge
has only 8,333 and you have to pay significantly more for that too.
You have options, like you have a choice
of how you're gonna spend the next 18 hours of denark.
And yes, it's only 18 hours left or one minute
as he's telling me, so I'll be faster.
If you're taking just one takeaway from what I'm saying
is like, there are two things that I'm really highly
encouraging here besides enjoying denark
and enjoying the fantastic conference
that every one of the volunteers is building for you here.
It's like number one, network, talk to new people.
However you like in whatever size you like
and whatever quantity you like.
If you make one new contact per day,
that might be what you wanna do.
And number two is, can we go back to the 10,000 years
of experience and it's like, the pool is huge.
You're part of that pool.
Make sure everyone brings something to the table
and I'm sure every one of us has something to learn
from each other.
So talk to each other, ask more questions of,
then what did you have for lunch yesterday?
Maybe try out how to figure that and with that.
I wish you a wonderful show, a wonderful day,
enjoy, we're happy to have you here
and I'll hand it over to Moritz in time.
(audience applauds)
- Hey everyone, I'm Moz, I'm the Vice Chairman of Denark
and today is the most beautiful day of my life.
I actually have the time that was scheduled to me
by Patrick, thank you.
(audience applauds)
So as some of you might know,
Patrick is always the visionary guy
and I'm the guy who eventually has to give you all the facts
which is the thing I enjoy, facts, figures and numbers.
So, let's get started.
We are 625 attendees at Denark.
We are sold out.
46 students and it's even bigger.
We're 150 plus people remote.
This is the largest Denark ever, again.
(audience applauds)
And with that, for my favorite moment of every Denark,
could please everyone whose first Denark
this is raise their hand.
Welcome.
(audience applauds)
We hope you enjoy it.
We put a lot of work into it,
but sadly, despite all their efforts,
not everyone could be here.
You may have seen it.
We sold out a month before the event started
and so really Denark could be this big,
which is absolutely insane.
But scaling a conference is quite hard
compared to Berlin, which Patrick said
you had a choice really, you didn't, but here we are.
This area is 3.5 times the size of Berlin
and it's quite a lot of work to make it your home.
You've probably seen all the amazing stickers
the team has put up.
This took us less than 24 hours.
It's also more shirts, more badges, more questions,
more answers, more Wi-Fi.
And we can all handle that.
We have an amazing team who can do all this,
but we need you guys to scale the spirit.
Denark is a community event.
We're not doing this because we're getting paid.
Denark is a labor of love by a small group of volunteers
who spend a ton of their free time
to give you this conferences.
This means two things.
(audience applauding)
This means two things though.
One, if something's not working all right,
let us know, please just maybe close one eye
and try to help if you can.
And the other is that really we need your support.
We need Angels.
If you haven't already, please talk to the info point
or join the Angels Signal Group or the Angelsus team.
We really need the help.
But you already gave away the applause.
I still want to thank the ORGA team.
As you can see, it takes a ton of people
who spent months of their work
basically since the last Denark ended
to bring you this event.
Thank you to everyone.
(audience applauding)
(audience applauding)
But as always, someone has to pick up the bill.
And the bill is roughly for you guys
somewhere between 27 euros if you're a student
and we really want to keep that price to 300 euros
if you are a full paid business ticket or a late-comer.
But each and every one of you costs us 550 euros.
So you can do the math.
On average, the ticket price is roughly cover 40%
of our turnover and the other 60% is covered by our sponsors.
And now I would ask our diamond sponsor,
IPH and Portis, Sasha, to the stage
to tell you why he's here.
(audience applauding)
- Apologies, I need notes.
Once upon a time, 17 years ago, we had Denark 1
and we are roughly almost not sure about the statistics
like seven, eight times bigger than that.
I am Sasha, I am standing here as a sponsor
for Portis data centers, IPH for quite a few years now.
And we offer co-location Hamburg Luxembourg and Munich
and please see my wonderful co-workers at our booth.
And that's all the marketing things I wanted to say.
I actually wanted to have some welcome words
of not more than 90 seconds
that will be totally meaningless for your lives.
But I'm gonna share it with you anyway.
Why are you here?
Is it your passion, your hobby?
Is it work related?
Are you collecting new contacts, new businesses, new deals?
Whatever it is, maybe it's just the food and the social.
Denark has you covered.
You can meet all types of people here
and I think that's really awesome.
I see scientists, physicists working on layer one
and probably below engineers building protocols
and operators working every day hard
to keep everything running.
All of these are here and we need all of you.
I share the older ones too.
I urge, I'm sorry, I urge the older ones
to share all the knowledge that you have.
There is something to learn every day.
Learning never stops and the younger ones should listen
and they should understand the basis
of what has been built in the past
and keep going and improve the work
or actually make it work because
just because something is old doesn't mean it's less crap.
So please keep going and improve.
Just for curiosity, who of you below 25
knows what a null modem cable is?
(laughing)
Okay, just to get an idea.
- You know 25.
(laughing)
- They were all below 25.
So we all know the passion for technology
and the joy when something finally works
or we made a business deal.
And that's what we share and that what unite us
to create a better internet, having it evolving every day.
So what I actually wanted to say was
I got a bit carried away.
Welcome to DINOC 17.
Welcome to Essen.
I'm really happy to see all of you.
(audience applauding)
- All right.
Thank you, Sasha and IPHH.
We also have a few other sponsors to thank.
Our Platinum sponsors, Flex Optics,
Nokia, Nesevo, Thomas, Granny P.S.
Then our Meet Me sponsor, Atlas Edge,
our coffee sponsor, Bee Kicks,
our lunch sponsors, Telstra and Decakes
and our Lanyard sponsor, Santaro.
And our gold and support sponsors.
Thank you very much.
(audience applauding)
Also besides Patrick's little side note,
also thank you to Deutsche Telekom for the internet.
Quick housekeeping, as we said,
we need this community to scale with you.
This means the DINOC community is open and inclusive.
So please treat each other with tolerance and respect.
We of course encourage free speech
and an open exchange of ideas,
but please keep it professional, don't get personal.
Should you at any time feel Harris,
please talk to Patrick myself.
The entire DINOC board,
everyone walking around with a crew badge
or just email us at foshnet@denoc.de
or our first names at DINOC.de.
If you have questions, talk to our help desk down below
or email us at event@denoc.de.
Now for the most important stuff, Wi-Fi.
Yes, we have Wi-Fi, IPv4 and IPv6
and 2.45 and six gigahertz.
We're doing a bit differently this year.
We have a DINOC 17-open Wi-Fi with OWE,
so opportunistic wireless encryption.
And the main conference Wi-Fi this year
is the Wi-Fi DINOC 17 with any username and password
if you're feeling creative.
Otherwise, please just use DINOC/DINOC
as it's printed on your badge.
And we'll give you more details on the Wi-Fi we built
in the closing, but this career R code
gives you fancy beautiful graphs.
Then for the social tonight,
we will be at Kukarei Hansa in Dortmund.
This is a bus ride and to get that bus,
you should be on time.
So please be at the bus stop,
which is basically just leave the house that technique
to the right, make one corner and get into a bus
by 620 sharp.
You can also find that information on your badge.
And with that, over to Francisca and the program committee.
(audience applauds)
- Okay, this is indeed very bright.
Okay, quick, a very one welcome also from the program
committee side.
I am Francisca and together with the Basembecker,
I am sharing the DINOC program committee.
So we are still restructuring the DINOC program committee
and with any sensible restructuring process,
I am already, I think, talking the third consecutive time
on this, but let's recap.
For everyone who isn't aware, historically the DINOC PC
was basically a set of volunteers who had the task
to compile the program that you see during the conference.
And at some point, we sat together and said,
hey, this is becoming a real community body
as a conference, it represents a large part
of the things we do in our community life.
The program is an integral part of the conference,
so shouldn't be the program committee also community
based elected with a mandate from the community.
So this is what we start implementing now
for a couple of times.
So long story short, what are we doing?
Three members of the program committee every year
stand up for election and other people from the community
can run for these three seats.
This year, Florian Moritz and Wolfgang
kindly offered their seats for re-election
and you can still volunteer to become part
of the program committee that compiles
the now two amazing conference tracks
you will see this week.
Until eight o'clock today, you can select your,
volunteer yourself for the program committee,
you can see the details on the Denog 17 website.
Long story short, we need a quick bio of you
and the picture and just sent it to the program committee,
the email address is in the reference.
And the elections will start tomorrow
and they will last until the end of the week.
So you have some time to cast your votes
and we kindly ask you to actually do that
because it's only a community mandate
if the community actually takes part.
So, and with that, I would like to thank my colleagues
from the current program committee
who put in a lot of time and effort
to go through all the submissions
and make sure you have an amazing program this time.
So thanks everyone.
(audience applauds)
Yes, it has been mentioned,
there was a lot of commotion about it.
We have a second track right now.
As you see, and as Patrick has already outlined,
basically we do run two full parallel conference tracks
at this point.
So you get almost double the content,
but we are also doing this for the first time.
And we know choice means you need to see where do I go,
what do I watch as a recording?
And if you have any feedback for us,
if you would like to be one track to be, for example,
super topical, super niche
or targeted at different experience levels,
just come talk to us.
Because for us, this is the first time as well.
And we made a decision how we are running this time.
And we are very, very, very much welcoming your suggestions.
And kindly, more with compiled a couple of numbers.
And actually, we got 67 full submissions
and selected 55 sessions out of that.
So that is actually a pretty good turnout.
And I think we may even able to increase the number
of content we receive,
now that everyone knows we actually have much more space.
And I would like to thank everyone who submitted
and helped us to form this conference program.
And with that, again,
you can volunteer yourself for the PC,
come to talk either to Sebastian and myself
if you want to know about the logistics
or find any other member of the program committee
if you want to know what the work actually entails.
There's also a description of what responsibilities
could be on the website.
So basically what we expect from a PC chair.
And now we take a quick break
and then we kick off with our first talk.
Thanks everyone and have a lot of fun.
(audience applauds)
