API URL: https://media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93339
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-81769-denog17-closing
Title: DENOG17 Closing

Okay, and with that, I hand over the stage to Momo, Tim and Patrick for the closing remarks.
Thank you everyone, when I created a schedule I didn't anticipate it.
I have to compete with trains, but here we go, so I know there are two kinds of nerds
and probably half of them like trains and the other like statistics and hopefully the
Venn diagram is only one circle, so let's see.
I have no clicker.
I have a clicker, so as we started Denog with a little warning and emergency exercise, just
so you're aware this is also a physical exercise talk, so prepare to club or not, that's up
to you.
That is already an excellent start.
So with that, thanks to all presenters and submitters for making this conference possible,
without you, this would just have been empty halls, but nice meeting still, but anyway,
thank you to everyone.
As Denog, we wanted to give back to speakers this year, and so we ran an experiment of
sorts on Sunday and offered a voluntary speaker coaching for our coaches, we hired a professional
coach, gave the speakers the opportunity to present their first five-ish minutes of
the talk and then get a feedback on their voice, tonality, posture and all of that stuff,
and it was really positively received by the speakers.
So we really want to do this again next year, and I also urge all other conference organizers,
not only to invest in your conference, but also invest in your speakers.
On that same note, thanks to all Harold's who announced all these amazing speakers,
and thanks to the program committee who selected all those amazing speakers.
Now we have to change the program committee a bit, Francesco already mentioned it in the
opening, we're restructuring the program committee right now, three positions are up
for grabs, it's mine, it's Florian's and Wolfgang's, Wolfgang and Florian are running
again, and we have I think six total volunteers for these seats, voting is open until Friday
end of day, so please make use of your vote and form the next era of the program committee.
Also please rate the talks and conference, it really helps us out, I'll leave you a second
to take a screenshot of this or scan the QR code, and you can even rate it on ICEs without
IPv6.
Wonderful, now for the beautiful pictures.
Welcome to host at Hnik where we had to build a network.
This building is from 1930, so when we came here first for the initial site visit to figure
out how to build a network, we found this.
We found a museum that still carries STOM1, no jokes, some patch courts we found are
from 1999, so probably older than some of you, and not that much older than I am just
to be completely in front of you, but we didn't have any network plans, they were
somewhere lost in the time, so we had to do a lot of reverse engineering in the halls,
and so we bought some visual fault indicators from China, turns out 15 MW in China means
megawatts, not milliwatts, which has an interesting side effect because now it's also a fibrous
scope and you can visually inspect if they're virus dirty.
We also tried troubleshooting in the field with it, and it turns out it's really easy
to identify bar cuts, no jokes inside on that, so as said in the opening, we have built
tri-band Wi-Fi for the first time here, and what's really interesting to us is that almost
40% of the Wi-Fi clients are already on Wi-Fi 6 with 6 GHz, which is amazing.
Yeah, congrats to all of you, you bought new devices, additionally we experimented with
the Denox 17 open Wi-Fi, which offers opportunistic Wi-Fi encryption, so even if you connect to
an unencrypted network, if your device supports it, your connection will be auto-encrypted,
and 44% of the devices on that also, or on this network also supported it.
We were using at peak times 35 access points, we got a 10-gig uplink from D-TECH, and we're
using some of the loan equipment from Event Infra to run this whole event.
Speaking of, if your organization has equipment to spare, especially modern full-table routers
with 100-gig ports or multi-gig switches, please donate to Event Infra, or just donate
money, and also thank you again to Dutch Telekom for the uplink.
Now to our video team.
As you may have seen above me, there is still a beamer here, but we thought that's not sufficient,
so Patrick and Chris got a credit card from somewhere and bought a 9 x 3.5 meter video
wall with 1.9 millimeters pixel pitch, it's beautiful.
I think we had, I don't know how many 20-ish boxes, each weighing 300 kilograms, so it was
a lot to carry in.
Luckily, the folks from Neumann and Müller helped us with that, and then we had two stages
to cover, so in this main stage we have four cameras, three facing me, one facing you,
and inside B we had another three cameras, in total 13 total video sources, and one kilometer
of cables were laid here.
Thanks to this amazing video team that not only recorded everything, but also brought you
all the beautiful graphics here, the info, beamer, and everything, thank you.
Given that track record, probably by the time I'm finished talking here, all talks should
have been already uploaded to YouTube and media.ccde, so you can watch them on the train, but probably
download them here first.
That is a really amazing time, 45 minutes average release time is insane.
Shipping other stuff was also interesting this year.
As you may know, for the past years we rented a sprinter van and drove through Germany with
tons of boxes, and this year I got to satisfy my personal desire and buy a lot of boxes
from our packaging, which made me extremely lucky that it arrived in time.
Some has lost the logistics department, but still, it made it here.
And now it's time to tear down all this stuff again.
Which means we will put the auger into crates, don't worry, we gave them croissants, there's
also coffee in there, they will survive until Dnock 18.
On a more serious note, we will start tearing down, please do not tear down anything.
We have already got enough volunteers for helping, so thank you for that.
But you can do us a real favor if you leave this floor right after this talk because we
have to actually get quite some stuff out of here in the next hour.
You can hang around at the info point and the meet me rooms, so yeah, just please vacate
this floor as soon as you can.
And then for my last slide, I'd really like to extend a big thanks to the entire house
they're taking a team who have been amazing, who trusted us in, well, doing some archaeology
in their building to put stickers everywhere to build this giant video wall, which I think
never has been here before.
Thank you to the entire team.
And with that, go over to Tim.
So some highlights of this Dnock 17.
We had hundreds of meet me sessions, we stopped counting them or comparing them, a lot of
them.
We ran, we are very limited and of space at the end, we tried to push more tables into
the meet me rooms, but I think I hope you all could do all the meet mes you wanted to do.
We had a very amazingly full attendee wall compared to the last Dnock, lots of more of
you let us photograph you and put your stickers up and that gives a really, really nice impression
who's already here and you can see who you want to find and who they made look like.
We had 27-7 presocial attendees in 28 restaurants as I told yesterday in the closing only 44
cancellations, but this time automated with the automation from Sasha, so we're getting
better here and less work for us and more fun for you hopefully.
We had multiple site events on Sunday, which was great, more companies are coming to Dnock
and seeing us here as the event in the year and organizing all their customer events around
Dnock and that is seen with the site events on Sunday, which is great to see.
We have over 2,500 coffees served, that were more than expected and more than expected from
the coffee sponsor who is bringing the coffees.
So a big thank you to big kicks to making it possible that we had already still today
enough coffee maxed to serve the coffee to you.
As Mumo said, I think we transformed the house, the technique to the house, the Dnock.
It's very nice here, unfortunately the last day, but with that, please remember to pick
up your t-shirt if you haven't done on your way to the info desk, all the t-shirts for
the online tickets of t-shirts are shipped today, so they will arrive in the next days
at your home.
A good bye from the Orga, a lot of people in a lot of different roles.
In the Orga crew with Anita, Christian, Emma, Fiona, Julia, Janina, Lara, Philip, Sasha,
Sebastian, Stefan, Theo, and Utter.
On the C3 work, the Francisco and Sophie, and from event info, AK and Emily, as a project
leads, more it's myself, Patrick and Kai, we are starting organizing in the, in general,
we start organizing with a biweekly call, one hour a week, doing smaller stuff, also
some meetups, then it's got more regularly, we do a kickoff, we do our off-site to plan
for new ideas, new features and so on and so on, and over the weeks, when Enoch is coming
closer and closer, they are joining more and more people and when we started working, building
up here on Saturday, we thought, okay, like, no, there might be 15 people or so, and then
when we called for the, the no break on Saturday, I think we were on 30 people coming from
somewhere, not because they were hiding, because some, everybody was doing something
somewhere and we were 30 people in this build up and that is really crazy how we manage
it that we scale in this way and this is only the tip of the iceberg, this is only from
the, from the auger and then become further to all the angels who are helping in the info
point, the hero, it's, so we managed to scale this denork that you can quite easily sign
up for an angel shift and help here and that is really what I love and think it's
a great thing, so thanks to all of the, of all of you who are helping in some of the
shifts and thank you to all of the angels, thank you.
And thanks to you, thank you for being here, for giving us the input, what to do, how to
do, for rating the talks, ranking the conference, giving us input and for being here and being
the great networking, human networks, here to meet us, thanks you all.
So hello everyone, you might know what's coming now, but let's go back in time for a
little while, because my first denork was happening in Darmstadt actually, in a small
meeting room and what we have today, I think we all take for granted.
So we come here, we expect this conference, we expect it to always be bigger, better,
more professional and all of you will make plans for next year already, as soon as that's
announced and when it's going to happen, but you're going to come here with the expectation
of having this amazing event in place and we heard from Tim how many people were involved
to make that happen and that's true, however, looking back in time again, denork has changed
as well, so we founded a foundation in 2017 and I think this was the start of denork becoming
what it is today, so I would like to get the board on stage please, so that is going
to be Janina, Florian, Tim, Patrick and Moritz.
And there's one more person that is unfortunately not here today, which is Nicole, so we keep
her in mind, maybe she's watching, maybe she's not, but it's important to mention that these
five that are here, plus Nicole, so these six individuals here spend a lot of their spare
time and way more spare time than all others that help to make this event happen, so please
have a big round of applause for all these six that make this possible, so we brought
something nice for you guys, and last time and it was a really bad idea, we got some
real flowers and Anita and I didn't think about how the hell should they get these flowers
home in the train or on the train, so this time we made sure you can get this into your
luggage, and you, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, it's more,
and so thank you very much everyone, and yeah, we're looking forward to having you again
and I think we understand this is not just something you do in your spare time, but something
you really like, you really love, and there's also three of you, and I really tried hard,
where's the picture, oh there's coming, there's three of you, and I really tried hard with
chat GPT together with Julia, and I think with Tim, I mean Tim, we see you, after the
third iteration I think Patrick got blonde long hair, and the three of you, thank you
very much, because I think what you three do and the responsibility and also that you
carry and the time you invest and also the dedication you bring makes Dino Creole special,
and I know you thank everyone all the time, but somebody needs to thank you, so this is
what we're going to do, we have something really nice for you and your loved ones, and
please give everybody a standing applause for those three amazing guys.
[Applause]
So then we go further, not too far, too far the outlook for the next year, we are obviously
already starting to plan for next year, we want to have meetups, we had six meetups this
year, more than the year before, so next year obviously more than six meetups, we want
to have them, you can help us and be a location host for the meetups, email us to the event
that Dino or talk to us, and then let's see how many locations we manage to serve next
year, member days they are already defined on February 6th and 7th in Castle again, so
if you have time mark your calendars, come to the member days, and then Dino 18, some
rush from that later from Patrick, then the Dino EV General Meeting, as we have the association
in the background who is at the end responsible organizer of this conference and all the meetups
and so on, we have our general meeting, it was announced to all the members, so who of
you is an individual member, got already an email, we will send in the Zoom invitations
then later on, and so on, the same procedures every year, probably you know that already.
At this Dinoog 17, we had the inauguration of a new working group, which is great, working
groups are growing, we have more of them, more and more, and in Dinoog 17, we inaugurated
the access working group, and here's the statements basically from the co-chairs, Christian Giza
and Andreas Kinfler, what's about it, the access we gave is about access networks and technologies,
it's about operating systems to the relevant devices and it's about regulatory and legal
issues, there are around 57 people at this inauguration, so this is a really high interest
and they got a fantastic feedback, so if you want to join, you will set it up with mailing
lists and information on the website and the next newsletter, so then feel free to join
that working group, and first step, I hand over to Patrick.
This is a very confusing Dinoog for me, I still have a voice, I slept six hours, this
is strange, let's see if I can do talks in that setup, so for the first time, or actually
the first time, but for the first time we did a full leadership track on Sunday, we had
leadership training sessions included in your ticket price, we did not upgrade your
ticket price for that, so you get additional benefits out of that, especially for your
employers, if anyone needs to sell how to get back here next year, that might be an
option, I want to thank Philip Schalenbach and the Esquire leadership advisors for coming
in, for setting this up, this was really well appreciated, the feedback was really good,
thank you for doing that, love to have you back next year obviously.
And we want to invest more into the leadership track, and our thought is that we will have
a leadership track alongside of Dinoog sessions, of Dinoog events, which is based on the theme
of from tech, for tech, we want to have engineers, architects, people who come out of the industry
give and share their knowledge to individual ICs, to people rising up in the ranks, figuring
out how to deal with the mess of management, figuring out how to survive in the chaos world
of management bullshit, to some extent, but also to strive there and enjoy, if that is
the track you want to go, and we believe we can play a vital role in that, we believe
we can offer an additional benefit, but that's our belief.
So we're interested in your feedback, it's like should we actually go that route, or is
that a bad direction, and is that a gap that is missing today, maybe that already exists,
with my product manager head on, we should definitely not reinvent something that already
exists, so tell us, we need your feedback on that.
If you believe that's the wrong direction, tell us, if you believe it's the right direction,
tell us as well.
And with that, the most anticipated part of the talk, I was like, I'm going to talk about
where we're going to go next year, this is going to be exciting this time.
So I thought, how about how to make this entertaining and exciting, and decided to talk
about 27 and 28.
We're already starting to look at 27, 28, which then in turn is Denark 19 and Denark
20.
For the better part of the last nine years, I managed to figure out not to have Denark
in southern Germany, which meant I did not have to sleep at home, which is for every
one of you who does the conference circus on a really high scale, it's like I love being
at home, it's amazing, but doing the family duties and doing the conference at the same
time, that can only go badly wrong.
So we're doing that, that's the last stop on our Germany tour, we haven't been there,
we will do that in 27 and 28, we're starting to look for places.
If you have ideas in this set up, this has become a tiny bit difficult to find places.
So if you have ideas, send us emails, talk to me personally, talk to Moritz, Tim, Kai,
or send us an email at event at Denark day.
We're going to be announcing more exciting things next year, I'm not telling you where
to go because we don't know yet.
The other one, one more talked about this at the opening and I want to talk about sorts
that we have to go further in the future.
So as you might have seen, the cost of a ticket on average is somewhere between 27 to 299
euros, that is good, we want to keep it this way, I want to be very clear on messaging,
the student tickets will be consistently cheap.
We want to encourage students to be part of this community and I strongly believe in
the whole team, strongly believes we need to enable them to be able to come here.
So that's going to stay the same.
Even though that we're on an average basis by far the cheapest engineering conference
in Europe on a daily basis, we're going to want to stay at that level, we're still
going to have early bird pricing, we're still going to have reasonable pricing, we're not
going to address that going into the future significantly or make any changes.
The question that we have for all of you is, and we're going to ask that in a survey
that will be coming to your inbox in the next couple of days and it will only come to those
of you who bought a corporate ticket, we would like to propose, I'm already there, never
mind, spoiler, the proposal that we're bringing forward is that we're going to equal corporate
tickets with the cost of an individual ticket going forward in future and we'll want to
understand from you is how badly is that breaking your possibility to buy corporate tickets
and we need feedback.
So we're going to send this out to the corporate ticket attendees.
We want your honest feedback, like there is no value in you all telling us this is an
awesome idea and then no one buys a corporate ticket any one next year.
So be open, be clear if that's a bad idea, we will acknowledge and we'll figure out a
different way but I'm going to find some way how to make this awesome and at least get
a zero out of it at the end.
With that, I already spoiled it but this is really surprising, Denog 18 in 2026 is going
to be in Essen and it's going to be from the 15th to 17th of November here, we're very
much looking forward to see you all, I hope to have you all back, already looking forward
to the what we call Raul Raz and Kickoff group and forgetting this started and looking
forward to working with the whole team.
Again, thank you for attending, have safe travels, see you again in 2026, if you don't
yet follow us on social media.
Have a good day, bye bye.
[applause]
