API URL: https://media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93137
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-81766-newcommer-session
Title: Newcommer Session

(upbeat music)
- Good morning, everyone.
Welcome to the newcomer inter-discussion session
of D-Knock 17.
I think we missed the qualification part
of who is a newcomer and not,
but we're inclusive and happy to have everyone
wants to do a recap after last year or the last 10 years before. So, good to see you all of you.
Quick show of hands. Who is here for the first time in person at D-LAC? That's huge. Very good
to see you. Happy to have you. Thank you for making the space and time and traveling to Iceland.
the. So my name is Patrick Busman. I'm the chairman of the DNAC EV foundation and the association that is behind this. I'll walk you through 21 slides in now I think 14 minutes. So we'll be fast. I'll try to get to the end very quickly. So that we can have Q&A at the end. All of you at the end have a choice to either stay here and watch the opening in the comfort of this room. Or.
We're trying to finish early so that you can move over to Zala and see it there. At least I have to go to Zala. So you're in decently good hands. That they don't start without you.
Good. Let's do this. Next slide, please.
Again, this is me. Next slide, please. So we're going to talk quickly about DNAC and how this is separated. Let's try this again. It does not work.
The next. And next. And next. Let's see the full slide. Good.
And what you see up here is what DNAC is not an association. DNAC is not a company. DNAC is not
anything that runs. DNAC is all of you. That's a community. It's an open and inclusive community
of network professionals. Many of us, many of you here in the room plan and run networks.
The idea of this is to have a forum where you can all work and discuss about problems.
You can talk about what's happening and you live this mostly throughout the year on the mailing list
and the IRC cheddar and the metrics. Just for the, I'm guessing someone knows up there but it would be
lovely if I can read my slides. It's very tiny. Okay, I'll do this from up here.
The other part is the DNACIV. So the DNACIV is the foundation behind what is DNAC. That's the
commercial legal entity, the one who will get there. His goal is to generally improve the quality
of internet. So roughly eight years ago and nine at this point, we realized that DNAC is growing so
quickly. We actually had to have a commercial entity, something behind it that runs it. It is
not a company. It's a foundation. It's run by members. All of you have control over it.
That is general DNACIV. You can become a member. It can be part of plenty things that DNACIV
deaths throughout the year. I'll list them up here. Today, DNACIV has roughly 300 members.
If you want to become a member personally, that is an option you have for about 30 euros a year.
If you think your company would be interested in becoming a member,
the membership opportunity is there, started 500 years a year. That is generally how DNAC is
funded and we are able to run those conferences, meetups and all of that throughout the year.
Think about that. From a general idea, it's like how can I participate in DNAC if you want to be
part of it? Number one, you made it here. That's awesome. That's really good. We're really happy
to have you. It's like we're doing this conference so that we can bring new people to it. We're
traveling like a circus every two years through all of Germany to make sure new people can come in.
Awesome. Fantastic. Happy to have you here. The challenge for all of you newcomers this time
would be like it said one goal. Don't try to take it all in. We have six floors. We have three days
of conference. There's so much going on. Try to experience it but figure out one goal that you
want to achieve. Meet new people and make that one new contact. The person you always wanted to talk
to, the appearing person you always wanted to yell at, not literally. We want to be decent and
nice to each other but the person you want to always talk to. It's like find your spot. See what's
going on. If you want to go a tiny bit further, there's options that we have. You can volunteer
throughout the year. You can volunteer to organize the conference. You can volunteer to run for the
program committee. The candidates are still up and you can still do that until the end of the evening
or if you want to, you can become part of the event worker and even contribute to organizing
this conference. Plenty of options. If you want to contribute throughout the year, we have working
groups and mailing lists and if you want to, you can create your own working group inside Dnock
and come up with something. Two of the working groups are actually physically meeting here today
so if you're interested in something, check it out. It's on the calendar and you should be able to
see it on the website. If you want to go further than that afterwards, it's like we have two rough
tracks that we're going for. One is the ORGA track. You volunteer at the conference or
somewhere else. You go and work in the working groups. At the end, you join the board and make
sure I get kicked out finally and can do something else with my life. Awesome idea, please do.
Or you decide you want to be a speaker and share your knowledge. That's a very good idea as well.
Come to our meetups where you can easily start, get in. It's like 20 people usually. It's a very
easy setup. If you feel you're a bit more experienced and want to share more knowledge with more people
come to the conference. We have lightning talks for 10 minutes. Take that, attend. And then we're
always happy to have plenty of new camera talks at the conference by itself. We have plenty of
options for you to -- for the PC to help you get ready. If you want to, we had a speaker coach
yesterday here on site the whole day for all of the speakers who were coaching them through
their first experience to their seventh experience. And even people who've been doing this for 20
years did this. So plenty of options there. We're spoken about the meetups generally. We just want
to touch on that for two seconds. Meetups are what we do throughout the year. So in all of Germany,
we host meetups roughly around 10-ish a year. We're trying to do two or three a quarter. And the
idea is that inside of companies who host by offering space on site, we have two or three technical
talks and then have a nice gathering and networking. If you're interested, we're going to have roughly
10 of them as well next year. If your company has space and wants to host a meetup, please reach
out to event at the end of the day. We're always interested in having new spaces. And then last but
not least, this conference couldn't be organized and couldn't be run without the angels. So we have
a core crew of about 15 people who do this all year long. And then we have about at this point
80 people who run this conference on a volunteer basis, additional throughout the days. Those we
call angels. You can still sign up to be an angel here on site. You can pick up shifts for two hours,
three hours throughout the day. And you basically get a view behind the scenes. You meet new people,
you get introduced to a lot of new people. You have a chance to attend the event from a completely
different site and make plenty of new connections. So if you want to do that, if you're interested,
go to the info point and talk to them. They're happy to have you. I'll click through the other
slides quickly and turn my radio off which I apparently left on so that all of you can listen to it.
So the engine part we had, if you want to go back and look at the other things that we did before,
you can look at the previous events from the last years. They're all on the dinner website.
But you can also look in the GitHub repository if that's your preferred choice. And all of the
talks are recorded by our awesome live streaming and video team here on site. They produce them
in near real time afterwards on the YouTube channel. And if you prefer on media CCC as well,
you can go in there and see the talks from today. Not while I'm talking afterwards, preferably.
But you can also see the last 10 years of talks. So I highly recommend to check that out.
The ISC we spoke about, the mailing list you most likely know as well, well-being is important.
For one of the main things that is really important for us is that everyone feels safe
at this conference. Denock has a clear code of conduct that is published on the Denock website.
We do not tolerate any behavior against the code of conduct. If you haven't read the code
of conduct yet, I highly recommend you do. There's sane and normal thinking things in there.
The general idea is we want to have as little rules as possible. So in order to do that,
we need all of you to be decent people. Think. Think again. And then behave friendly to each other.
We highly encourage a professional exchange of ideas. That is completely possible.
And absolutely should be done on a topic basis. But we absolutely want to guarantee that we're
excellent to each other and respect each other's position. And also the fact that people have to
get paid and therefore sometimes have to have a company position as well. If you have any
questions, please reach out. If you have any issues throughout the days here, whatever happens
whenever a situation is where you're uncomfortable, where you don't feel safe, where you think that
something needs to be addressed. Or you have a question. Option number one, go to the info
point downstairs. They're always there. They're happy to help. They can get you anyone. If you
don't want to go to the info point, you can go to the crew room here on 609. People will help you
there as well. If you don't want to do that, write an email to forestand@denarkd or if you want to
address a specific person on the board. All of them are listed on the slide, so reach out directly
to one of us. Everyone is brief at the same level. Everyone is happy to help you.
With that, I think I'm nearly in time. Do we have questions?
Yes, sorry. Harold. Do that myself, apparently.
All right, thanks. So who do I have to talk to for a lightning talk?
We have the PC. You can write an email to PC@denarkd or you can talk to the PC who's going to give an
introduction at the welcome session. If you want to reach out to them directly, come to the crew
room afterwards. We'll make an introduction. Any other questions? Any Harold? All good? I'm fine.
Good? Anyone else? Questions? Oh, sorry. That was it. I'm misunderstood.
To join the community, I can join as a person for sure. Maybe attend to the conferences and
being a member of the EV, but when I want to join as a company, and maybe I want to have
speakers here, and I want to have some, a little booth there. What's the best way to apply to that?
So we separate between two things. Everyone is welcome to be part of the community, even companies.
If you don't have to do anything, you don't have to be a member. Everything at Denark is free and
accessible for everyone. If you want to enter into a membership relationship with the association as
a company, talk to me or anyone from the board afterwards. Find us on the website or at the
booth. That's an easy one. If you want to do sponsoring, we have -- we're in the lucky position
of selling out insanely quick. I'm sure Moritz is going to talk to that in the opening, so I'm not
going to spoil that. But I highly recommend doing that, absolutely. Read out to sponsoring
at Denark. If you want to, you will be helped there, or talk to anyone of us.
Good. I think I'm during the other stage unless we have other questions.
And we're not doing this again, that I do this day to talk here and the other one as well.
Questions? Awesome. For everyone who wants to go to Azale, we're going to line up in twos
outside and then walk -- sorry, couldn't resist. See you in 10 minutes on the other side. You can
stay here. It's going to be streamed here as far as I understand. Otherwise, walk over and see
you in the other floor. Have a good one. Thank you.
