API URL: https://media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93140
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-78781-evolving-inter-link-s-software-delivery-lessons-in-fast-consistent-and-safe-deployments
Title: Evolving Inter.link's Software Delivery: Lessons in Fast, Consistent, and Safe Deployments

(upbeat music)
So, and this will be our last talk before the lunch break.
This is from Paul from Interlink, Paul is lead CI/CD
developer all around the customer portal.
And he will give you an insight about their learning
of with their automation and their systems which they set up.
Please welcome Paul on the stage for this talk.
(audience applauds)
- All right.
Yeah, so I'm Paul.
I'm here to talk about evolving Interlink's
software delivery.
So, what is this about?
This is actually just going to be a story.
So, a lot of just
random stuff that happened
over the years.
And of course, with any story, we
have to start by setting the
things that we tried to track our usage,
carbon usage, across everything that we are doing.
And then of course, trying to reduce it
and then offset when necessary.
And for this to happen, we kind of need to do,
make sure that actually we try to automate everything.
So, next point, fully automated.
Because by doing so, it allows us to have all this,
track all these usages a bit better.
But also, that's definitely just a better experience
for our customers.
And the next thing that we want to do
is also make sure everything that we do is transparent.
So, when you go to our portal, you get a service from us.
You can see the status of your service.
You can see the usage.
You can see the pricing.
Everything is, we want everything to be transparent.
So, how do we actually do this?
We have a portal.
I just mentioned it.
So, if you go there, you just go there.
You see the dashboard.
You say, click at a service.
We have a bunch of services.
IP transit, IP access, the usual stuff.
And then, say, you click on IP transit.
You will be able to go there, select a port
in a specific location, configure a bunch of stuff
for your BGP session and whatnot.
And then, you can order.
So, essentially, what we're looking at
is if you just distill it down to boxes, it's just this.
You have a user, and then you go to the portal front end,
and you do stuff.
What happens after that?
So, when you finally get to place your order,
we just send a JSON payload back to our portal back-end API,
and then it does more stuff, like validations and whatnot.
So, that's basically it.
Yeah, not really.
So, after that, the portal back-end,
after doing all the validations and processing,
sends another payload back.
So, now we're going back into our internal systems.
We call the first back-end API internal back-end API
Cortex, Cortex does a bunch of stuff.
So, now, going into an internal side of Intilink,
it does a bunch of stuff, so one of the things it does
is it just goes to our ERP and create the necessary resources
about the service that just got ordered.
And then, obviously, because this is a network service,
so we also use Netbox.
It goes to Netbox and creates a bunch of stuff.
So, if you're doing IP transit, it
could be, like, allocating prefixes, IPs,
the port, VGP sessions and whatnot.
Yeah, this is obviously not all because we're still at Netbox.
What we do after that, we have another system called Iridium
that gets triggered, so once all the stuff is there,
we trigger Iridium, which then pulls, it reads from Netbox
and pulls all the necessary information out.
And then, after that, it kind of translates them,
does some processing translates them,
and it exports them out to Git.
So, at this part, this is basically just the host variables
for Ansible, which we'll see right here.
So, once everything lands in Git,
Cortex does the next step.
It triggers what we call the deployer,
which basically just fetches everything from Git,
the latest host variables and whatnot,
and then it runs Ansible Playbook
and just pushes everything out to network devices.
Yeah, so if you put everything together,
it looks like this, a bunch of boxes, blah,
it's not super complicated.
But obviously, I'm missing some stuff
because I think right now, if my team members are watching this,
they'll be like, oh, we forgot this,
I forgot that I did forget a lot of stuff in those boxes
because if you talk about IP transit,
obviously you have to do validations for ASN, ASS,
we sing from hearingDB, the customer's prefix limits,
update writeDB, the ASS on writeDB,
we have to maintain prefix list to filter them and whatnot.
And we also have a DDoS platform.
So, if the customer for IP transit also has DDoS with us,
then we have to remember to push the prefixes
to this DDoS platform or to enable
DDoS specific PGP community for their sessions.
And of course, there's also things like billing,
yada, yada, yada, so what I'm actually trying to get at
is that there's some inherent complexity
in all these things that we're trying to do.
I mean, when we talk about complexity in software,
there are like various ways to measure it,
but I'm like super basic, so we just go with lines of code,
right?
So right here, you see interlinks first,
so the first commit in this repository that we have,
2022 February, 60 lines of commit,
I actually looked it up just out of curiosity
and yeah, it's just a bunch of markdown actually.
And within the first year, we added like 50,000 lines of code.
And then if you look from 23 to 24,
we added another 120,000 lines of code in the last year.
So 24 to 25, we added about 60 to 70,000,
so a little bit less crazy.
But this is a staggering number, right?
So if you talk about 120,000 lines of code per year,
that is 10,000 lines of code per month,
so this is a lot of stuff that's going into our repository.
So what is this talk actually about?
As our software is growing with more products,
more features and more automation,
the way we work with our software also has to evolve.
So this is what this is about.
So it is about software, obviously,
and I know I got the irony when D not,
and I'm talking about software, so.
If you have to use the bar from now, now is also a good time.
If you don't want to hear about any of this,
I wouldn't be offended.
But so yeah, if not, let's get on to the story.
So chapter one, the beginnings.
So when Interlink first started,
we're talking about roughly here 2022 to 2023,
we're putting out our first 50,000 lines of code.
We basically, you know, this is just a start, right?
I just want to give a disclaimer,
I kind of joined a bit later,
so some of the stories here might not be entirely true.
Well, more or less, but maybe someone earlier
in Interlink might be screaming at me or so,
like this is not what happened, but who cares?
I'm giving the talk, right?
So when we first started, yeah, you know,
you first started a project, you start looking around,
hey, what can we use, what can we do?
And yeah, we just went with like, you know,
we use Django because we are essentially a Python shop.
We use Docker for packaging our stuff.
We use Ansible for configuring the devices.
GitLab, so our code.
For the front end, we have React, you know,
for some smaller APIs, we use Flask.
I mean, I think I'll hold a bunch of logos here too, right?
Like Netbox, whatever.
But the point here is that we are just using
like what we consider or what I consider,
very standard suite of tools, right?
This is fairly like decently modern stack,
nothing too crazy, nothing so-called legacy.
So, yeah, you know, we kind of started doing this,
started writing the code, and then of course,
at some point, we have to bring this code into production.
So it, yeah, it looks like this, right?
Developers hacking away, and then they just push the kit
to push the code to GitLab, and then GitLab's like,
okay, let me just deploy this stuff to Kubernetes,
and then we call it a day.
Yeah, maybe not.
So, when you push changes to GitLab right now today,
what we're trying to do is we have to test it, right?
So we run a pipeline.
We run a pipeline that looks roughly like this.
You build the packages, and then you start testing it,
so we use Python, so like PyTest,
we use black ISO for linting, MyPy for type checks,
and whatnot, and then once that's done,
we deploy this out to Kubernetes,
so deploy the whole environment to Kubernetes,
and then at the last stage, we run E2E tests,
so things that test the entire environment, so more tests.
And of course, at some point, once you do that,
then somebody comes along and say,
oh, I'll prove you're a merge request,
or pull request if you're in GitLab world,
and then once that's done,
then you just try to bring it out into production.
So same thing, once you merge into main branch,
we build everything again, we test everything again,
just to make sure everything got merged properly,
and then we deploy it to staging.
Same thing, Kubernetes, so just like,
Kubernetes apply whatever.
But then, at the point in time, we have a gate,
so it goes like, are you sure you want to continue?
And somebody actually has to click it, right?
So, I mean, this all seems like sort of reasonable.
Obviously, it isn't, because then,
I wouldn't be giving a talk here.
The thing is, whenever we merge stuff,
and then this thing, all these changes gets deployed
into staging, then we need someone to press a button
for this to go into production.
And this is called a release,
and this is obviously manual,
because somebody has to be there to do something,
to trigger it.
And this is kind of how it looks like,
back then on our Slack channel,
so I kind of pulled this out.
So, from the stand-up meeting,
who's going to take over the release today?
And then some guys, just like, I'm tired of this.
So, how about let's go to draw the short straw.com?
And then, of course, on your team,
someone's going to say, oh, yeah, you know,
if no one volunteers, I'll do it.
And then with the sweat, smelly, emoji kind of thing,
so I think he doesn't really want to do it.
And you can see this goes on for, like, 18 replies.
So, obviously, we're not working,
we're just talking about work.
And what the heck is this?
Draw the short straw.com.
It's basically, if you go there, it says,
if you can't decide who should do the unpleasant task,
then we draw straws to pick, right, to decide.
So, that's what draw the short straw.com is.
So, obviously, this manual release is an unpleasant task.
The other thing we had once we set everything up
was that people were complaining that the pipelines were slow.
We measured it, we measured this.
You're not supposed to be able to read the small numbers,
but essentially, the whole pipeline for making a change
goes about 19 to 25 minutes.
So, yeah, I mean, you know, it's long enough
that I could, you know, do my lunch or something,
but it's not like in the grand scheme of things,
and retrospectively, it's not super long.
We'll talk more about it later.
But there's something that's even worse
than having slow pipelines.
It's basically the pipelines that try to guess like you.
So, it kind of looks like this.
We're talking about unreliable pipelines, right?
So, you have people, you have your developer locally,
it's like hacking a bunch of stuff,
and then they put it on GitLab, and GitLab's like,
oh, everything is green, this is perfect,
but the guy, the developer locally is still like,
no, I don't think so, there's something wrong with it.
Or you can have it the other way around, right?
Oh, it worked for me locally,
but then when I put it on GitLab, everything is red.
And what people do after that is they just go to GitLab,
they click retry, and then they just start praying, right?
This is what we did for a while.
So, my hot take, actually, it's not really a hot take,
I think it's more like a warm take,
because I think a lot of people would agree with this.
This is not just about the tech, right?
You can pick a very modern stack,
but you can do like a lot of not so great stuff with it.
So, we move on, right?
Moving on, you know, interling, scrolling a bit more,
and we move on to the stage where you started
adding like more and more code.
And this is like the problems that we talked about,
it's like getting even worse.
So, we talk about manual release, yeah, it's not great,
people just talk about who's gonna do it, blah, blah, blah,
but it's not just about that,
because it also really slows down our velocity.
So, on an average week, it could look like this.
People are putting out features, features, bug releases,
but everything gets stuck on staging.
So, these are basically features, bug releases
that the customers cannot see.
The other thing, of course, it's a button,
I said it's a button, but basically,
there is like a procedure to doing this, right?
You have to go check this, and then click the button here,
and then check that, and then whatever.
So, there is a process to it,
so it takes time for people to do it.
And if you find a bug, and you wanna do a hot fix,
it's also terrible, because now you have to go through
all the unreliable pipelines, and then you have to go in,
and then you fix the thing, finally it merges,
and then you have to do another manual release.
So, you go on a Slack, and you search release, hot fix,
yeah, it's like full of it.
There's also like a little side effect
about having hot fixes that people don't want to do.
It's like people try to find workarounds for it,
so it's like, oh, I could be smart about this
if I change the data here, then the bug doesn't get triggered,
so first I started doing workarounds too,
which is obviously a really bad thing as well.
Another issue, so if you put out five, six features,
bug fixes changes, all at the same time,
it's very hard to find a bug, because if you look at,
so you made so many changes, now there's a bug,
where did it come from?
It's like a bit harder to find it,
and maybe it's just there,
maybe it's an interaction between two different changes
and whatnot, so you get these kind of problems.
So maybe you're like, wow, all this talk,
why not just get rid of the stupid button, right?
You have the stuff there,
just get rid of the button, things will just go, right?
Yeah, unfortunately, it's not so easy.
The thing is, our pipelines, as I said, were not reliable,
so what this means is, if we remove the button,
we just ship like bugs even faster,
which is not really what we want.
And of course, part of it is you want to make sure
that your pipelines also get to run more tests
to cover your code base a bit better.
So we need to take a little bit of a detour, right?
So yeah, with that, we go on to Nick's chapter,
in case the chapter's title is not obvious enough,
we are talking about unreliable pipelines here.
So where do we start?
It's like people tell you it's unreliable, what do you do?
Very simple, exactly where it is.
So whenever a developer says this thing worked locally,
but GitLab doesn't agree, then you just stop them,
and it's like, okay, what actually failed?
You start asking questions, like, why actually fail here?
What is it that you think works,
and what is it that GitLab thing doesn't work?
And you ask, like, why does it have different results?
And also, for me, as a third party,
like, can I actually reproduce this locally?
Because if you cannot reproduce this,
then you're going to have a lot,
like, it will be very difficult to fix it.
So what we found out over time is that,
you know, you have developers on your local
doing a bunch of stuff, so maybe they do, like, Docker build.
But on GitLab, you do something different,
like, Docker compose build.
Or they do PyTest, they use, like, the local environment.
But on GitLab, we do something different.
We go into the containers, Docker compose exact,
and they run the PyTest.
So this is not great.
So if you run any science experiment,
you need to be able to control for your variables.
And that's exactly what we try to do.
So after a while, we're like, all right,
developers, GitLab, you have to do the same stuff.
So if you want to build, this is how you build.
If you want to do a PyTest, this is how you do PyTest,
et cetera.
And, of course, to make things a bit more user friendly,
we just wrap it around in the script.
So Titan is just the internal name we have for our stack.
But if you write a best script for it,
it could be a make file, whatever.
You standardize it, and you document it,
and people will start using it.
So now, when developers come to you and say, oh, I ran it,
it doesn't work.
At least you have something to work with.
You know they ran the same stuff.
You can figure out, it's easier for you
to figure out what went wrong.
Or, like I said, it's also easier for documentation.
And also, if something breaks on the pipeline,
you know exactly what you need to run locally,
because you can run the same stuff to try to reproduce it.
So it makes it much easier to debug.
So the point I'm getting at is,
you need basically one way to build your stuff,
to do package versioning, to deploy, to lin, to test,
all that kind of stuff.
So I have only one way.
There's an asterisk there, but basically,
not everything would be one way, but that's just details.
So I don't know if you remember this part of it.
So when we run, like this integration tests,
we try to test everything in this flow.
And what we do is we spin up test environments.
So it looks good, it's like kind of isolated,
so different merge requests, different test environments.
But in reality, it's not exactly like that.
Because we could share, for example, the same Git resource.
We could be sharing the same ERP environment.
And this makes things really tricky.
Because when we write code, we write with the assumption
that the code has access to the resource,
and they're the only ones who have the access.
But when you start mixing different environments,
trying to write over each other, stepping over each other's toes,
you're gonna get basically a lot of bugs.
So this is what happened with us,
because we had pipelines that pass it sometimes
when there's the only test environment.
But then when you have five developers
trying to run tests at the same time,
then you get this sort of issue.
So you get to try to isolate them.
For example, for Git, it could be as simple
as just making sure people write to a branch
for every single merge request,
different test environments.
For ERP for us, it was a bit more complicated.
Here I just said, oh, you can just kind of isolate them
by customers.
So different services belong to different customers.
You run tests on different customers.
In reality, it was a bit more complicated than that.
But those are just details.
The point I'm trying to make is that
you just try to make sure you isolate everything properly
in your test environments,
whether this isolation is like a fake or virtual isolation.
That's like you should just do that.
Otherwise, gonna have problems.
Another thing that we found was flakiness.
So when GitLab deploys out to Kubernetes,
so this is for testing, right?
What we do to be able to run HDV requests
to run our tests is that we actually do this thing
called port forwarding.
This is basically a tunnel from GitLab environment
into our Kubernetes cluster.
And then once you do a port forward,
then you could do something like pytest,
like localhost80 and just runs tests.
But turns out this feature from Kubernetes
is not very good, not very well-incommented.
If you just go online and search, it's horrible.
So this flakiness, this tunnel keeps breaking for us.
And after a while, you kind of just bypass it.
So what we did was instead of having the tests
run from GitLab to Kubernetes,
we just schedule a job on Kubernetes that runs the test.
So things are running within the cluster
and then wait for it.
And then after a while, you get the results back.
And that's it.
So what we're trying to say is we just wanna get rid
of these sort of flakiness.
But of course, you cannot control for all of it.
Some of them will always be there.
For example, if we depend on an ERP,
we don't host an ERP, of course.
These services could be done.
So you can do things like automated retries and whatnot.
But you have to kind of balance it, right?
So you can say, I wanna run GitLab instance for this.
Like our own GitLab instance for this.
You have to ask yourself and figure out
whether it's actually worth the work.
So yeah, when it gets bad enough, then do it.
Otherwise, nope.
So we've, you know, pipelines are more reliable now.
The next bit of it, my code's compelling.
So obviously this doesn't really apply to us.
But what we're really talking about
is just slow pipelines.
So how slow are we talking about?
I think it was something like this.
So like five minutes to build, four minutes for unit test,
four minutes for deployment,
and then like 15 minutes for unit for E2E test.
So the first point is you gotta measure it.
Otherwise, you don't know where to improve.
And after measuring it, obviously,
you go for the ones that takes the most time.
So basically the E2E tests.
So what does that really look like?
For us, E2E tests is trying to test everything in this flow.
So for example, I say I want a provision IB transit,
I want a deep provision IB transit.
We have also have IP access, Flex Ethernet, DDoS,
so we want to do all of that.
At some point in time, we also introduced lag
with added lag support.
So we're also gonna wanna test that too.
What about aggregated commit?
So we have this feature that allows you
to aggregate your commit across different services.
Yeah, we have to test that too.
Oh, what about reusing ports?
Yeah, we have to test that too.
And you wanna test this also in different combinations, right?
We talk about lag, we talk about port reuse.
What about lag reuse?
So this combination starts to explode like very quickly.
And what happens is every time you add a feature,
you can see the pipelines getting slower.
So that's not great.
So what we did, we just tried to parallelize everything.
So I show you a cortex back in API.
So this cortex back in API also actually has a queue
and a bunch of workers, so it's very simple.
Just create a whole bunch of workers and you're done, right?
So multiple workers takes on multiple tasks,
things run faster, and you can do it something like this.
So obviously, when you say deep provision IB transit,
it cannot be paralyzed because it depends
on provision IB transit.
So this is how you can kind of send in the work streams,
so to speak, or here I wrote parallelizable units.
And then when you add more stuff,
then you just add more workers, right?
Unfortunately, not really, because in our systems,
when we're trying to write the netbox,
this is something that we have to control access to.
So we cannot have different workers trying to figure out,
for example, if there's a port in a certain device,
otherwise you just get into concurrency problems.
So we have a lock for this.
So if you just keep increasing the workers,
you're not gonna get much faster because of that.
So what can we do?
Very simple, we just paralyzed my environments.
So we got good from the last chapter at creating environments,
so let's create more environments.
So if you make one MR,
let's have a few of different environments,
and then we start building tests on all of them.
Yeah, I mean, there are of course challenges to doing this.
So first thing, independent tests.
So the test has to be independent for you
to be able to paralyze them.
What I mean is that if you have dependencies,
you cannot run them together at the same time.
Also, you have to be good at spinning up environments,
otherwise this is just gonna make your setup
way more complicated.
And we also ran into a bunch of concurrency bugs.
They're not super fun to debug, but yeah.
Also, if you talk about slow pipelines,
a whole other bunch of things you can do.
We got on newer hardware,
try to figure out how to use less test data,
slimmer images, blah, blah, blah.
So there are also a bunch of other things
other things you can do
to try to make your pipelines a bit faster.
So the tip here is write independent tests.
You don't have to paralyze everything from the start
because it could be just making things
more complicated for no reasons.
But if you start by writing your test,
making your test independent,
then it will be easier for you to paralyze things
down the road when you need to.
So with that of the way,
go back to this,
trying to get rid of the button, right?
Saying goodbye to this.
Yeah, can we actually get rid of the button now?
Yeah, sort of, right?
But you have to just remember a couple of things.
You have to make sure that when you're doing deployments
that there is no service disruption.
Otherwise, if 10 and marks get merged in one day,
then your service goes down 10 times, not great.
You have to make sure how to handle breaking changes.
So when you rename a column on the database,
like how do you actually handle this?
And also, because you are making changes so quickly
all the time, you have to be,
you have to make sure that you are,
you have good monitoring to know when something breaks.
But of course, you also have to have someone watching it, right?
You cannot just, I have monitoring.
It's like alerting my channels like 10 times a day
or something, and nobody's looking at it.
That's like kind of pointless.
Another thing that is really useful to have
is how fast you can roll back these changes.
It doesn't have to be like a split second,
but just knowing that like,
operationally how to do it and how fast you can do it.
It's good.
So my thought take for this is, you know,
try to adopt this like method of continuous delivery,
so no manual buttons, no manual release by default,
so you don't have to go through this pain
of trying to get rid of all the different issues
first before you get there.
But there's an asterisk to it as well,
because it depends, right?
Like if you're doing software for, I don't know,
if you're trying to push a new iOS update to my phone,
like I don't want this to be delivered to me every second,
every like 10 times a day.
So you have to see how it works in your context.
Yeah, so is this like the end of everything?
Did we fix everything?
Yeah, I mean, let's do a bit of stop taking, right?
So how are we today?
Pipelines are not actually that much faster,
but they run a lot more tests, so that's kind of nice.
Pipelines do still fail, but we actually know why,
and we can try to mitigate them.
Obviously we stopped using this.
So I show you this complexity slide.
This is February 2025.
So November 2025, right here we are today in November 2025.
Within this year, we're already at another 60,000 lines of code.
So my hot take is this never ends.
So where do we go from here?
If this never ends, because we're gonna wanna have
more products, more features.
Doesn't this mean more tests?
Well, kinda, but we can try to do better.
So we don't have to run tests for everything
every time we make a small change.
Can we run our tests more selectively?
Or can we just delete tests?
Because usually, sometimes people just keep adding stuff to it,
but if you go back and review your tests,
maybe you're like, oh, they're just testing
for the same stuff, there's no need for it.
Can we re-factor our code so that we don't have to write
the tests?
For example, we look at products like IP Transit, IP Access.
There are a lot of very similar things to it.
Can we re-factor it so we don't have to test them twice?
Another thing we want to do is just have more test coverage,
especially in this area that I was just putting there.
And this is something nice to have.
So in the end, we're trying to deliver network services.
So yeah, you know, it would be good if after doing all
the weird JSON-y stuff that in the end,
the network devices do get configured correctly.
And finally, I think this is the point of it.
I keep showing you graphs of us adding more
and more lines of code.
But the truth is, actually, maybe we do want to.
We should try to reduce the complexity.
This could be removing stuff in the picture.
So like, hey, let's get rid of Git.
Let's get rid of using Git, not get rid of Git.
Maybe not have locks.
Is that possible?
Yeah, that could be possible.
Could we re-factor our code base?
So yes, less code, you know, that kind of stuff.
So we don't want to keep, so for every product we add,
we don't want to add 10,000 lines of code.
It's not something that will scale for us in the long run.
So let's try to look at this from also another perspective.
Yeah, so with that, actually, that's all I have for you.
So thank you.
And I know it's lunch time.
(audience applauds)
Thank you for your presentation.
And again, I see already one hand rising.
Well, thank you for this very interesting talk.
I'm quite interested in the bottom right corner
of your diagram of the pipeline.
Exactly, that's where you deploy the stuff to the hardware.
And the question is, how much of that do you simulate
and how big is your environment of real hardware
where you test if the deployment is successful?
So I've been, if you saw towards the end,
there's we want more test coverage there,
as far as you can imagine.
But at least what we have today for that setup.
So we have a container let's set up for us
to be able to just test some stuff.
We have a laptop with actual hardware also
to also test some stuff because there's some stuff
that container let this allow us to do.
And then finally, we have our actual devices.
So how much tests are there?
Basically, I would say not enough,
but then this is just a paranoid, me always speaking,
like we want to always test more.
For example, like I said, I gloss over this very quickly
towards the end.
When I say I create an IP transit,
the result of all this stuff that happened
is that the BGP session come up in the end.
And that's to be frank, like something we cannot answer today.
So that's what we want to answer by adding all these tests.
So this is the end result of all the configuration
that we get it.
So yeah, did that answer your question sort of?
Yeah, if you want to know more,
we can also talk more about it.
- Thanks again.
And thank you everyone for being here.
This was our last session before the lunch break.
We don't have time for more questions, unfortunately.
So if you've got any more questions,
I guess you're around today and tomorrow as well.
So feel free to find Po to ask the questions
in a face-to-face meeting.
And hope to see you later again.
Thank you.
(audience applauds)
- Thank you.
