API URL: https://media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93329
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-84571-going-large-extended-route-targets-or-extended-confusion
Title: Going Large: Extended Route Targets or Extended Confusion?

Okay, the last talk in this room. Our next presenter is Robyn. He's a freelance consultant
specialist in network design operations, cloud infrastructure, software development and acoustics.
Please join me in welcoming Robyn to the stage and enjoy the talk.
Hello. We're in for a very quick lightning talk. I made those slides on Sunday, so don't
expect the design award for those. First of all, we're going to speak about root targets
today, specifically in combination with EVP and VXLAN. Sorry for the buzzword, but it
is how it is. Let's first, there we go. Yep, let's first speak about root targets. I'm
I'm not sure whether everyone is familiar with root targets so let's go quickly.
All right, root targets are used for many types of VPNs.
>> If you want to visualize it in a very simple way, you can imagine
>> We're going to talk about it.
>> It's a good thing.
>> Let's go into BGP communities. We're going to give us 48 bits of payload. We still have
the old standard communities with a value on communities like no export, all that kind
of things. But we also quite recently got so-called large communities in ROC from somewhere
2017. ROC 1892, that gives us, so they start with a 32-bit AS number for byte AS, so it's
already for very modern networks with lots of ASs. Then you actually get 64 bits of payload
after this AS number. Now we look into the EVP and VXLAN root targets, specifically.
Root targets are very often used with EVP and VXLAN. In this case, they are formatted
as AS number, colon, and then your VNI, which usually has 24 bits. And EVP and VXLAN, we
usually have, like, large fabrics. We have EVP only fabrics, so each router gets its
own AS number, so if you have a large fabric, we can't just 2-byte ASs, we run out very
quickly, so we've got to use 4-byte AS numbers. And now if we do the maths, we have a 32-bit
AS number, and we have a 24-bit VNI, which are supposed to be concatenated and put into
this root target. But this root target only has 48 bits of payload. That's kind of a
problem, and that leads to all kinds of funny consequences, like, for example, cumulus
Linux. They just state in documentation if you use 4-byte AS numbers, they simply turn
off auto-root target generation, which is kind of a problem. You have to set it all manually.
And in case of Junipero, they just take the lower 2-byte of your AS number, so your root
target is something part of your AS number, and then your VNI. You can't cut short the
VNI because then you will have some kind of collision, and you really don't want that.
So the idea is we want to build some, I want to build some type of new root target, I just
call it the extended root target. And we will base it on BGP-large communities. We can't
do it with extended communities or standard communities, but we have those very nice
large communities which actually give us enough space. They have 64 bits of payload. We actually
only need 56 bits, so that would fit. But there is another problem. BGP-large communities,
they don't have any kind of predefined or reserved value. They just say, okay, you have
your 4-byte AS, and then you have whatever you want to put in there with your AS. They
only say that the usage of the maximum 2-byte and 4-byte AS is discouraged. It is not recommended,
but this is actually an advantage because we could simply move this recommendation, do
not use the highest AS, we could move it to actually reserved. We introduce a new kind,
we extend BGP-large communities, we simply introduce Yana-managed BGP-large communities.
And this way we can just say, okay, so this maximum 4-byte AS is now reserved for Yana-managed
communities. Then we add an 8-bit type field because somehow we need to distinguish between
different types of extended or large communities, reserved communities you want to add. And
then if we do the math, we have 96-bit, we have to take away 32-bit for the AS, that's
fine, we take away 8-bit for a type field, we also need that, that leaves us with 56-bit
of payload, which is actually exactly what we need. So in summary, yeah, let's introduce
extended root targets and make all our lives better. It might make debugging easier, but
in the end, the question is always, do we need this? For me personally, it would make
debugging much easier because when you debug like root announcements and then you have
like this cut-off AS number in your update message and your root target, it gets quite
tricky to do the maths all the time, so it would be great at least for me if we had something
like extended root targets and would be able to get rid of this hack of either defining
it manually or just using the lower two bytes. All right, that's basically it. Really quick
lightning talk, as I said. Thank you.
[Applause]
>> Thanks, Robin, for this really lightning talk. Do we have some questions? Oh, there's
one at the end of the room. Again, please remember to state your name and affiliation.
>> Hi, Fiona from Wobcom. Considering that the ASN auto negotiation thing for EVGP
fabrics is a mess nowadays. And yeah, all of this is awful, but our targets haven't been
around since EVPN. We have used them before for like free VPNs and a lot of other stuff.
Do you think it's worth it to introduce another kind of root target and to increase debugging
burden and complexity and breaking vendor up again?
>> I mean, that's a very valid question. I mean, that's why I added this slide specifically.
Is it worth it? I mean, for me personally, I would say it is worth it because I've done
a lot of work with EVPN, the excellent fabrics, and this is one of the little pain points,
one of the things that triggers me a bit like seeing this dirty hack into your root targets.
I would just like to fix this. And it shouldn't, in a theory, break inter-minger of ability
in practice. I don't know.
>> Yeah. My hot take about this is drop the ASN all the way and just use it as a field.
Just start with one. >> Yeah. I mean, I've had some thought about
this actually. And usually for EVPN, the XLAN, for your import root target, you just set a
wild card. You set a wild card AS, then you just import the VNIC one and half. But there
are some interesting applications where you could actually filter with the AS number for
some special applications. But, yeah, I mean, you currently simply can't do it in a sane
way, so that's why nobody is doing it. >> Okay. Thank you. That concludes the discussion
and the talks in this room. Thank you very much for presenting.
>> Thank you.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
