API URL: https://media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93185
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-79056-channelmania-future-proof-your-dwdm-network-topology-while-keeping-it-flexible-for-1-6t
Title: Channelmania! – future proof your DWDM network topology while keeping it flexible for 1.6T

(upbeat music)
- And our next speaker and the last presenter
for this session is Thomas Weibler,
as you clearly can see on the color scheme
from Flex Optics.
And his focus is on creativity innovation driven
by real life customer problems.
And today he will show us how to keep
our DWDM infrastructure future proof for the 1.6 terabit world. And I've been told this
is a completely new presentation, so enjoy. >> Thank you very much, Francisco. You might
already head, I'm pretty sure you had that experience. You have a really great conversation
with someone you know and you do a really deep technical dive and then after that conversation,
>> I'm Thomas Wieblek, and I was actually that one having a conversation.
It's very intense conversation, but it was great. And the topic we were talking about
was mainly about DWDM networks in large scale and also on high data rates starting from 400
gig with coherent modules or coherent technology in general. And while we were talking, there
were some key wordings always used. There was this balance receiver mentioned quite often
and also the colorless thing. And then I got back to the company, had a conversation internally
with some folks, one of our hardware developers got, and it turned out to be a real brain
fork. And that's the talk about. So I want to show you what we did and achieved and why
it is so complicated and to give you a little bit more in arts about the balance receivers
and colorless. So let's start easy first. Lasers. Lasers have been around for a long period
of time, started in the '60s, but those lasers were not usable for us in the telecommunication
industry. They were big, they were power hungry, and they needed a lot of cooling, especially
with liquid nitrogen or something like this. And in the '90s, '70s, the first semiconductor
lasers were really helpful and usable for us running at room temperature in small size.
And when we focus on them now, so what has been involved since the '70s, it looks a little
bit like this. So up there, we have the typical unmodulated line width of a LED. So you have
a center frequency or a center wavelength of 1300 nanometers and an unmodulated line
with this nice bell curve with a rough width of 100 nanometer. So it's quite broad. When
we get up here to the February parallel laser, which is mainly used in one gig technology
or the data rate, this is getting really a little bit more narrow, 10 nanometers only,
and it was very characteristic with those two side peaks next to the center wavelength.
And then the interesting part is now getting there. On the green section, distributed feedback
lasers, we're getting closer, just one nanometer of the width of the peak now. And I also show
here with 125 gigahertz, so we change it from the wavelengths to the frequency now. And
the most latest development here on the red one on the red side are the external cavity
lasers, which are used for coherent modules and have a really narrow line width of one
megahertz only. So why was Korea not pushed earlier out into the field? It's a tricky question.
But first of all, let's look what we need to do a transmission in general for coherent.
For sure, we need some compute power to do all the compute for the higher order modulation
to get bits and bytes out instead of having this constellation thingy where we come later
on. The other thing is you need a precise laser there for your optical carrier, and you
need an amplification as well to reach a longer distance, and the signal itself gets disturbed
while it's traversing on the fiber, the velocity of different frequencies changes, and you
need a compensation of the dispersion. Now, for coherent, the add file or the amplification
and the dispersion compensation fiber was around, but we were lacking precisely lasers,
and especially we were lacking the SPs to do all the math and the calculation. It has
been done in the past, but not in real time. It was offloaded to big number crunching computers.
They got the data from the analog digital converter. They did their math, returned the
result, but this was not in line rate, actually. This was offloaded. So what else can we do?
When we want to increase the traffic per fiber, in general, in the top one here, we have our
optical carrier, and the optical bandwidth itself, which carries all the information
content we want to move forward to our receiver, is in this curve as well encoded, or that's
the information content. You have two choices. The first one is, and I'm pretty sure all
of you are using this. You use WDM technology, either C or DWM, it doesn't matter, and you
have different colors on your fiber, and you separate them with filters, and the interesting
part here is, well, you lose some spectrum between the filters because they have to separate
the channels with each other. On the other side, with the solution, too, what you can
do is basically fit in way more information into one channel, into one carrier, and make
it broader. So you increase the frequency of one carrier, and you fit in more information
there. Well, this, yeah, this was not really a brain fog, actually, it started now with
the complex numbers. One off keying is broadly used for 10 gig and 100 gig in a direct detection
minimum. So how does this look like? In the middle, there is our detector, that's the
central one, the most important one, but first of all, face here on the left side. We do have
our signal coming on the fiber, and either the face or the frequency is continuous, or
the face does change, or even the frequency does change. In a coherent world, it all happens
to the same time. Holarization is a little bit out there because I will come to that
one later. And it's going to hit the receiver. The receiver is a diode, a photo detector,
and it works pretty simple. When there is light on the photo detector, current goes through,
you get a one. If there is no light on the photo detector, it's a zero, because no current
is flowing. But for that photo detector, everything looks the same. It doesn't matter
if the face does change or the frequency, so the resulting digital signal, the serial
one, looks like this. It's all the same. And you are using this every day when you operate
biodeirectional transverse, because they make use of this effect, because the frequency
is different on a biodeirectional. Now, a little bit back to my talk two years ago about
coherent modulation, 16 quam, I introduced there. I don't want to go into details now,
but we introduced the constellation diagram with those 16 dots. The great thing is, we
have those 16 dots. We can encode four bits per symbol, and this increases our data rate
tremendously without increasing the boat rate that much. But looking now a little bit more
precise on those dots, and when we focus on one dot, especially, how do we actually
in that space locate that dot? There are two ways. There's the blue way either you have
the amplitude, it's a vector, so a vector has directions, and this vector also has an
angle, the argument. With those two variables, you can position that dot precisely. The
other way is, you use the x and the y component, also what we call the quadrature, the q component
and the in-phase component, the i-component. And for later on, we are going to focus more
on the in-phase component. This is pretty simple geometry, just to the calculation.
Yeah. What I said at the beginning was about this receiver. So it seems like the coherent
receiver is quite important, and let's focus a little bit more on the receiver side now.
And in the middle of, when we look at the first one as a single-ended receiver, there
is this coupler. The coupler is not an LC double X coupler, it's more the coupler is
based like you have two fibers, not touching each other, but very close to each other with
two interfaces, or in fibers and two out fibers. And when we connect them to our detector,
what happens is, in the phases on those two, we have two signals coming in. The first one
is our carrier, the optical carrier, the orange one up there, with the optical band,
which with the actual content, and on the second one, we do have a local oscillator.
The great thing is the local oscillator is taking from the transmitter of the same transceiver,
it's operating almost on the same frequency, and you combine it in the coupler, and within
the coupler, some effects do happening, but they end up together on one leg of that coupler,
and it hits the diet. And we get a signal, and the great thing is, because of that coupler,
when you combine the local oscillator with the optical carrier, you can detect the optical
carrier that's happening, and we have a down-converted signal on a lower frequency. I will come to
that later. The second one is, and now this balance is coming to place. On the incoming
interfaces, it looks all the same, but on the outgoing, it looks a little bit different.
We have now, instead of one detector, we have two of them. They both detect the signal
here, orange and green, green and orange. But the coupler has another effect. What the
coupler does, it does a phase change for the cross-port. So the cross-port for the orange
signal is down there, so this phase is changed by 90 degrees, and the same applies to the
local oscillator of the green signal. On the cross-port, the phase is also changed, and
now back to high school, when you do have a phase change, you have waves, and when you
have two waves, they are at the same level, and they overlap what's going to happen.
They get more gain, they amplify themselves, they are higher. So you get more output, basically.
On the other side, you get less noise, because also what they do is, on the noise level,
it eliminates in itself. And that's pretty awesome, and so our down-converted signal
over there has a way higher amplitude and less noise. So far for the general detection,
but now we have the phase, how do we get out the phase? Well, we need one balanced detector
for the eye component, and we need one balanced detector for the Q component. We combine them,
and the local oscillator is not fed directly to the coupler in a long time. We also split
the signal of the local oscillator, like we do it with the signal. We phase-shifted it
again for the lower part, for the cube part by 90 degrees, and within the coupler, we
do again for the cross-ports, the phase shift, and hooray. We have now two balanced detectors,
but they are phase diverse, then. We get the eye and the Q component, and we can really
precisely define the point in the constellation diagram where it belongs to, because we have
eye and Q now. And when it's not so, this is already somehow complicated, we add a little
bit more complexity there, instead of having two of those balanced receivers, we have four
now, because we have two polarizations. And again, in front, the signal is split with
the polarization beam splitter into two polarizations, local oscillator again, same set up. And inside
now, it's not only one coupler, it's a cascade of couplers and splidders, tiny semiconductor
components, and they are hitting each of them, the eye and Q component for the face, and it
does do it for the polarization, too, and also for the polarization, one up there. Somehow
difficult, and it looks a little bit like rocket science to build this, but there is even more.
As I said, we have this down-converted signal at the beginning, and we get rid of the low
gloss oscillator, we get rid of the optical carrier, but there are different ways to do
it. And the first one on the top, you see, it's called heterodyne. So what happens there
is, we have the low gloss oscillator running at a frequency at, let's say, 192.8 terahertz
for simplification, and the optical carrier is a little bit offset by roughly 622 gigahertz.
So the difference between those two carriers, or the oscillator and the carrier, is called
the intermediate frequency. And the drawback is what happens in that coupler is while we
also get a mirror frequency, which we actually don't want, because we have an upper part
and the lower part, but we don't want that lower frequency, the mirror frequency, because
on the mirror frequency, there could be another channel, and they would interfere with each
other, and we don't want that. So what happens, it's down-converted, and the intermediate
frequency is at 600 gigahertz. And all the folks who are doing electronics, building a
detector, doing 600 gigahertz, it's possible somehow, but it's really a challenge to get
there. So that's not really a solution. So the alternative, you can even see it now,
it's the homodine solution, well, just to it's simple, bring the low close to the exact frequency
of the optical carrier. Technology-wise, this is doable, the great thing is we don't have
a mirror frequency any longer, because they are overlapping each other, and you get a
perfect intermediate frequency of zero gigahertz, and running at zero gigahertz is great, quite
easy. The problem is, it's technically wise, quite difficult to build in complex, and when
it's complex, it's getting big, and costs money. You can do this with an OPLL, but nothing which
you can place into a transceiver. So the solution is the combination of both, called intra-dine
detection. What we do there is we bring the low close to the optical carrier, but not
overlapping. And the low close to later can be within that range of our 75 gigahertz, for
example, in this scenario for a 400 gig signal. So 37.5 gigahertz to the positive, and also
37.5 gigahertz to the negative side. Within that range, the low close to that needs to
be placed, and then the mirror frequency is not an issue any longer, because it's within
our carrier, within our frequency where we want to be. And then we don't disturb our
channels next to each other. And, hooray, the great thing is also our intermediate frequency
is at five gigahertz. And five gigahertz is something you can really easily detect when
you look, you detect it to that frequency. And this is also the important part on the
colorless thing, because now you can really filter only this spectrum or this frequency
for the receiver. In other words, the receiver only sees what he wants to see, and this is
not driven by a physical filter. Now it's driven by the characteristics of his own operation
frequency. About some numbers, when you look at a 400 gig, it's roughly running with 60
gigahertz. You need a detector doing 35 gigahertz, and for 800 gigahertz, it's a little bit
higher, and we are running at 70 gigahertz then. Yeah, so we almost made it. It looks
like we are launching and getting to the moon, but there's a little bit more, and when
we get to the moon, there is even a universe. And now let's look into that universe, what
we can do with these characteristics for coherent detection, basically. So, as I already said,
there are different speeds out there, starting from 400 gig up to 1.6 terabit, and the way
they get more information into our band is they increase the frequency, the overall frequency.
So at 1.6 terabit, we will end up, we need 300 gigahertz of a channel in the spectrum.
You can combine them all together on the lower part here, within, and you can imagine, this
is a filter, with three channels, basically, you can combine them all within one filter.
And when we do the math and do something like this, we will end up with a 400 gigahertz filter.
Because when you only look at a 200 gigahertz filter, the 400 gig, 800 gig would still fit
in there, but the 1.6 terabit won't fit in there any longer. So, you need something broader
than 200 gigahertz, and why are we focusing on 400 gigahertz? That's the important thing
on the commercial of the shelf. For sure, you could also stick to a 300 gigahertz filter
to fit everything into this filter block, but the 400 gigahertz is currently of the
shelf available. It's no specialty to build them. And in comparison, what we have done
in the past, we were running tons of channels, up to 96 with nice slices of 50 gigahertz,
but we lost also a lot of spectrum between the filters of each other. And a great benefit
as well is, when you look at the specs of such a filter doing 12 channels with 400 gigahertz,
every channel is carrying 1.6 terabit to the math, you can do there up to 15 terabits
on your fiber. And also, for the optics, folks, if they have longer spans, well, attenuation
and insertion loss is a critical thing, and typically we are there at 2 dB only for 12
channel multiplex. So, while looking back to those days to running a 40 channel 100 gigahertz
AWG, they are roughly at 670 dB insertion loss per channel, depending how they are distributed.
So that's a really great benefit when we focus just on those 12 channels, sorry. Because
we can also do interesting things now. We could cascade in there still 8 channels 50 gigahertz
on off-king 10 giga-bit legacy equipment or build your own super channel, because instead
of just fading in there, one carrier doing 1.6 terabit, you could also fade in 4 carriers
doing each 400 giga-bit and use a simple splitter on the out interface and distribute the signal
to all receivers and let the receiver decide which signal is intent frame. It would look
like this then. So, the other part has been built so far, because this is our mixed signal
going to the other part, but the lower one, the coherent module or the blue one only takes
the blue curve, because our receiver is locked to that frequency and tuned to that frequency,
and now we get a benefit out there. It can see all the waves, but it doesn't matter, or
all the 4 out of 3 out of frequency, but it doesn't matter, it just discards them and
takes the blue one and the same does the green, the yellow and the coherent. When I did the
first driver of the target in the company, one of my engineers said, "Hey, that's cool,"
but this is going to be getting a little bit messy, because typically on the multiplexes
you have all those ports. They are numbered, and now when you have a splitter, well, you
don't know what's actually at the end of that 4 splitter leaves. Basically, everything
gets to those 4 transceivers. He was right. So, the answer is, yeah, you need a frequency
plan. If you want to do something like this, so you become your own bay net star, or put
in this second tool to know, okay, that's a kind of a shared media, and we should know
on which leg of the splitter is which transceiver or which frequency connected. This is pretty
awesome. In my point of view, just making the fact that it's colourless, and we have
this -- the past, this broad receiver was used for bidirectionals as a benefit that it took
all the light. Now, we do it the other way around. We say, "Hey, we only want to lock
to a certain frequency and can even filter on the detector level without filtering on
the optical side," which is pretty gorgeous. For myself, I'm really looking forward to
the social tonight, because getting all there was really a brainfuck, and, yeah, I'm happy
to take questions, and see you also later at the social. Thank you very much.
[Applause]
Thank you, Thomas, and we actually have time for questions. Do we have questions? Please
wait, so I can see you. Okay, I think everyone is just very eager for the closing and to
go to the social, but thank you again. We know where to find you.
Thank you.
[Applause]
