API URL: https://media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93182
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-81768-day-1-closing
Title: Day 1 Closing

(upbeat music)
- We have some closing remarks, a review of the day
and what's to come and now Tim.
- Good evening, last but not least our closing for today.
I think we had a wonderful first conference day.
Yesterday was already the workshop day.
Today the first conference day of DNOX 17.
And as mentioned, please help us by writing
the talks, should it work?
Thomas pressed too hard.
So if someone can help me clicking for the next slide.
Excellent, thank you.
Please write the talks.
the the the.
And speaking of the program.
As also mentioned in the opening today, we are voting. We are voting for three new seats in the program.
Committee as every year.
The vote is the candidates can name their self at mailing list until eight to eight o'clock today.
So you have already two hours when you're sitting in half an hour in the bus to the social.
You can write an email if you want.
We have already six candidates.
We have Florian, we have Henry, we have Jan, we have Vanessa, we have Wolfgang and Walter.
And so please fill it up.
And then you all have a choice, a choice of new candidates and new program committee members.
We had a very nice social pre-social yesterday.
In fact, it was 28 pre-socials distributed over as in and neighboring cities.
Into these 28 restaurants, there were 277 people distributed.
And this distribution was done in the past by hand and excellent tables.
And we heard also today about automation and we started automating this.
In fact, Sasha started automating this and the world is more script.
So that we can input all the people who want to be distributed.
And then we can randomly distribute you to your blind peering spot in one of these 28 tables.
And we were very happy and thought, "Well, now it's easy."
We just click and it will do everything.
And then he clicked the first restaurant online.
And with the second, the open table, whatever, API's as well.
One credit card, one phone number, one evening, only one booking.
And then he found every restaurant twice, first for the registration.
And before yesterday evening, for a short confirmation that we are really coming.
So a big thank you to Sasha, who did a great work in making this pre-social
possible yesterday with a lot of manual phone.
[ Applause ]
Then now to the social.
Today evening, we will meet in the Koka Rahanza.
It's a menu for social events.
I need to move here, okay.
Then I move here.
It's a menu for social events.
We have, as always, 15-odd.
We have behind-the-scene tours.
There are tours for everybody through the historic solid warehouse
and all the historic buildings.
You need to wear helmets and the torch and so on.
I think it's interesting.
We start at 8 o'clock and have every half an hour of different tours.
So then we can line up there, but Theo will present on site also what you need to do
and where you need to be when.
And now the very good news is we have a place for everyone with an on-site ticket.
We made some last-minute changes and Theo put in some extra efforts to got more buses,
more places, and now we can save with this big denog.
We can all go to the social.
This is really, really great.
Please bring your batches that we can recognize you.
Transportation, as said, also in the opening.
It's important.
The buses are limited.
They're really driving behind the house.
You need to go outside to the right to the right.
And you need to be there on time.
The buses are driving and we don't have as much of them.
So please fill them, pack them.
There will be an angel in every bus to a guide you there.
It's quite easy, as said, to the right to the right.
Please be on time, really, really, really, but you can have a big beer.
If some English speakers are not familiar with this lurch, it's quite easy.
You go through the sponsoring area.
You go to these guys.
You take your bottle, go to the cloak room, pick up your stuff, and up to the buses and
we're on our way to the social.
So thank you all for participating and see you at the social and see you tomorrow.
Thank you.
