API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93301
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-79917-ixp-update
Title: IXP Update

(upbeat music)
- So welcome after the lunch break to the IXV update.
We do this from the DNOC program committee.
We are doing this now for the fifth time
and the idea of this update was
that VSDNOC, DNOC program committee,
send out a questionnaire to all the IXP operators
within Germany and ask them some statistics
and some input about what they're seeing
with their IXPs, with their internal exchanges within Germany.
It's carried out by the DNOC PC, as mentioned,
and with that, I jump to the next part.
We have basically three parts, some statistics,
the XP market.
So with that, statistics, the slide set is online.
It's how many traffic, how many peak traffic,
how many connected traffic all the IXPs have.
In the last DNOCs, we always showed them,
but just can get a little bit of boring,
just looking at numbers so you can do it in the slides.
It's afterwards, if you want to.
What we observed in general was that we didn't see
that much traffic increase in the 1890 percentile
of the IXPs, there were some bigger IXPs
with more traffic peak increases,
but mostly the situation was stable.
What I want to do is to look on the overall metro peaks,
so aggregated traffic from all the IXP operators
within one metro.
And there's always (laughs)
Frankfurt is very, very, very big.
And this is also a feedback to the community
and to you as peers at an internet exchange
that this is a single point with a lot of traffic.
So let's keep Frankfurt out and look
at all the remaining mid-roads,
where we see Berlin, the Sildorf Munich,
and Hamburg as the next following cities.
And then Stuttgart and then a slight drop
with the longer tail.
So if we cut out the top five,
the situation would look like this with Stuttgart leading,
and then Dortmund Leipzig, Nuremberg,
Lake of Constance, the Rienthala IX basically,
Dresden, South Austin, Nieda Saxen, and Brem.
With that short overview of how the traffic
is looking in distributed over Germany,
let's go to some news from the scene,
from the internet exchange market and scene in Germany.
So we sent out a questionnaire before this talk,
and we asked our XP operators some generic questions,
and then some specific questions,
and give them the opportunity to also present
some statements here to you and the audience,
to give a feedback what our XP operators are seeing,
or what they are dealing and what they want to mirror to you.
So the first feedback is here from Stuttgarta IX,
with they would like to see from the CDN's
more details on options and requirements.
As an IXP operator, you're always keen
to try to enable as much peers to your IXP,
and CDN's are obviously a bigger player in this IXP market,
so it's in this case for Stuttgarta IX.
Quite hard to get the insights from the CDN's
to even know where to talk, who to talk,
and how to get connections with them.
Big Hix likes to see more RFC 8.950 enablement,
so the IPv4 network layer,
reachability information with the IPv6 next hop,
making your network more future-proof,
so this is more on a technical side.
Now every peer can go home afterwards
and look at if your router and your software,
you are running on your router today,
would suit this RFC already.
Franco-9ix from Nuremberg,
they're looking for more eyeball and local IXPs,
and we will see it on their specific update later also.
Franco-9ix is the new camera, I would say,
in the last 12 months, and they entered the Nuremberg area
some months ago and really kicked through
and have a lot of traffic already on them,
but let's wait for the update at the end.
And numerously, on put was they welcomed
the work of the NetSpremse,
if you have been here in this room
before the network, before the lunch break,
then you have heard NetSpremse talk
or you can watch it later online.
Did Iix developed a tool called IXPACT,
and the tool is also online, you can look at it,
it's basically a new write of different tools
which were in the wild for some years,
like our watch, IXP watch, and Demon.
So feel free to check out the web page,
it might not only help you when you're an IXP operator,
but also if you're running bigger layer two networks,
maybe company networks, enterprise networks,
could be also interesting for you.
So with that, let's go to the next section,
the second section, layer three services at IXPs.
Normally the IXP, as we know it in the past,
is in layer two peering land with different peers around.
But in the past, the IXPs evolved
to more different types of services.
The peering land is the classic one which started,
what should be in high, like a point-to-point E-pipe
or VLAN is the kind of second product.
There are multi-point lands over an IXP platform,
and then IXPs also started to offer layer three VRFs
to build virtualized routers for customers,
and now we're looking at layer three services.
I will shortly explain what I mean with that.
So traditional, we have an I-peering land,
several ASNs connected to the peering land,
and if two ASNs want to connect to each other,
they build up a BGP session,
they forward traffic to each other,
BGP forwarding is the same path.
As this doesn't scale as that good,
the internet exchanges introduce the route servers,
so a peer is peering with BGP with the route server,
but the forward routing is directly between the ASNs.
So the IXP itself offers a layer two land and route servers,
which obviously have an IP address,
but there's no forward routing on the route servers.
So now let's assume that this one ASN number four here
is vanishing from the IXP or never was it the IXPs,
but this ASN is interesting,
because it's, for example, the CDN cache,
or it's a big access network or whatever.
It's an interesting ASN,
which the IXP wants to keep at the
edX exchange point in the peering land.
So what could you do?
You could give transit to that ASN four by another AS5.
And if that ASN five is operated by the IXP,
and therefore not only having peering sessions
in the peering land,
for example, the route servers with the other peers,
but then also forwarding the traffic
with an IP hub in between.
Let's call this a layer three service
as the internet exchange starts to evolve
from a plain layer two network to layer three services.
So we ask the questions,
do you operate layer three services?
And the majority of the IXP operators, 14 answered,
gave the answer that they are offering
in some kind layer three services.
Most of them offer in any kind an IP transit service
to kind of fulfill their portfolio
what they can offer to the peers.
And some do specific paid peering.
For example, Google VPP, Google Verified Peering Partner,
which we will look into in the next slides,
Liberty Global, Detalk, LGI,
and Microsoft Azure Peering Services.
Also, B kicks outreach is between B kicks
and other IXP as a layer three servers here mentioned.
So what is the Google Verified Peering Provider thing?
There's this very excellent talk from Dave Schwartz
from Google at the last nano conference,
which is linked here,
where he explains why they are doing it.
So what are they doing?
Google is reducing their engagement with the IXPs.
They are reducing, especially at the road servers,
they have left their own servers.
They have still some higher volume peers at the IXPs,
but all these smaller peers,
they try to bring them to the Google Verified Peering system.
So that basically means that Google qualifies IXPs
as their VPP qualified peer.
And if you are this Google Verified Peering Partner,
you can mention it on your website
and you can basically give transit to Google.
And with that, they want to collect the smaller networks
instead of collecting them over their out servers at an IXPs.
In the beginning, only IXPs were in this program
with Google VPP.
Later also IXPs started to offer this as a service,
at least in Germany,
we have from 3D answers that they are doing it.
So when we look on what does that mean for you
as a peer at an IXP,
probably you have less options for smaller networks.
You cannot choose different IXPs and transit providers
where you get your Google VPP traffic from
or your Google traffic in general from,
but you would look out for specific IXPs or IXPs
who are really qualified with this Google VPP program
and Google can very good control from where the traffic comes
to you, which obviously has some impact for you.
It also brings the burden for the IXPs and IXPs
that they need to follow this program, follow the rules,
and following such rules would probably also mean
that you are then on a cost-neutral agreement
instead of an agreement where maybe the IXP
or the IXP could ask for money from Google.
So now the IXP wants to bring back the Google traffic
to the IXP, they got through this program,
they can establish as earlier shown this ASN5 or whatever
and forward the traffic from their Google VPP
back into the peering line and therefore keep
or even advance their Google traffic.
And so the statement three is a feedback
what we got while the Google IXP peering was stable
at this IXP, the traffic which they got from Google VPP
went on top so they even managed to have more traffic
at the end on the IXP than before.
That just here as a statement, not saying good or bad,
but as statements that we get from the IXPs
operator and the questioner.
Last but not least as I mentioned earlier
with this shift and the IXPs applying actively
for the VPP, they are at the end
in this cost-neutral scenario where they definitely
do not get money from Google.
So at the end, the money which is needed to run the platform
needs to be on the B side, so basically they appear
on the other side.
Google VPP, then what our phone?
We all have heard it in the IXP and the talk.
Before the break, what our phone is going away
from the public internet exchanges,
at least from most of them, as I've heard in the break.
So they are withdrawing, they really want to go really away
and not offering a Google VPP similar program
to a wider range of IXPs and IXPs.
At least what the statement is from this week,
they are on first doing it for one third party provider
here in Germany and might expand it to other IXPs
in Germany and worldwide.
So in this step, IXPs in general,
as stated in the press release, are out of this game here.
So I would expect in this case,
would often traffic would leave the IXPs.
Also again, costs are on the B side
and in comparison to Google VPP
where we are on the neutral, cost neutral side,
the waterphone peering would be a paid peering.
And as I've heard in the lunch break,
which I can also state publicly,
we are talking about around three cents
for the mega bit in this scenario with the waterphone peering.
With that, I would head to my third part,
the feedbacks directly from the different IXPs.
The order is that those who answered last
are the first here in the slides.
We asked basically four questions.
What was your highlight?
What was your biggest change?
Then the third question, which is not here,
because there was no answer is,
what did you change which has no direct impact
on the product or which is a change
which is not directly related to a product?
And the last, which is the outlook
for the next years, for the next months.
So here, Equinix IX, you see the name
of the IXP operator on top.
We see a link where you can get more information
on the top right, either a screenshot or an image
with the IXP operator sends us.
So it's an operator.
They might operate in different patros in Germany,
but we only show one page for every operator here.
So Equinix IX, highlight, they have published
traffic statistics and 11 IX in the one terabit club.
So not 11 IXs within Germany.
Sometimes it's hard to differentiate,
is this specifically in Germany or is this worldwide?
We try to keep it locally to Germany,
not always that easy to differentiate
as the internet exchanges get interconnected
globally more and more, and therefore it's harder
to differentiate the different statistics.
They have a new global German product manager for IXs,
and I see class here in the audience,
so if anyone has a question to Equinix,
they have contact here.
Then, NLIX, I have also seen some colleagues from NLIX,
but now I don't see them here in the audience,
but if you are here, you can wave,
and people can recognize you.
So the highlight was more network stability
and then good architecture with Nokia.
They are deploying the Nokia Deep Field Defender,
and you can download the LOIS while provisioning.
This part of downloading LOIS and automation of LOIS,
I saw in very, in a lot of answers.
So this seems to be a topic which was not automated
in the past, and I also see in my affiliations
that this is a topic hard to automate,
so maybe this could also be an initiative here
in the community to make it in general easier.
So maybe the data center providers could team up
and help us a little bit to make those processes easier.
NLIX, upgrade all the international purposes
to the end of year, and with that, NLIX is also
in the sponsoring area, you can reach out to them,
but with that, we can head to ZONIX,
with this very, very nice picture of the countryside
where they are filled to be at home
or have access to their network.
They joined the one gigabit club.
(audience laughs)
(audience applauds)
And I think it's important that we get more and more
different IXPs in the wider area.
They fixed the font rendering on the website.
I think that is also very important to mention,
(audience laughs)
and that some routes are up there.
It's joined the Big Keys Outreach Program,
and they had a D-Knock Meetup.
So if you're also interested in helping D-Knock
with hosting a D-Knock Meetup,
please write us to event at D-Knock DE,
and we can set a date and try to be also in your hometown.
CDN caches are upcoming to new locations in Loa Saxony,
so there is something to do.
Then, from D-Kix, first itinerary customer last Friday,
and the border leaves edges for load balancing the traffic,
and they replaced the core routers
for saving especially a lot of power,
and as we see in general,
power costs are more and more a thing,
and especially with networking hardware
getting better and better,
and we have more capacities on higher dense line cards.
Those things are definitely a thing in our industry,
and want to move to more iconic pricing.
With that, two DDIX,
DDIX started two years ago or so in Tristan,
they had a very nice opening party,
and we saw the IP expect tool earlier.
They are now in a, I think, third pop,
and are starting with 100 gig ports
and peers hopefully in the next month.
Then, Rintala X, and you can start waving
if you're here and I don't see you.
Thomas from Rintala X, I talked to him yesterday.
He was very happy that they could close the ring
around the lake, and he said, as he has said it,
for years he wouldn't have come this time here
if he hadn't accomplished it,
so that's great to hear a ring around the lake,
full redundant underlay for the VPLS,
and they became a member of the ORIX Association,
so thank you Rintala for making the area
more redundant and diverse.
Then, Dortonix and Bremen and X,
they kind of merged as the operator of Bremix,
and they come acquired our R-bone,
so now I need to mention you two both on this one slide here,
as we only mention one slide per operator,
but no bigger changes in those two regions,
so if you're operating your network
or in Brem or in Dortment,
you're happy, you're happy, and they're happy
that you interconnect there
and bring more traffic and ASNs to the platform.
MIGA IEX, in general, global growth,
and obviously some IEXs grow faster,
some not, and they try to keep the growth and be big.
You can see it in the statistics slides at the end,
so for example, MIGA IEX in Frankfurt is quite big,
and look at the statistics for more details.
At the end, obviously, what is the value for you
or the IEXs, or is it a thing you need to look at?
Is it a specific IEX?
Is it a specific prefix?
Do you want to need a long tail?
Do you need a high volume?
But so those aggregated statistics
give only a introduction view for you,
and then you need to do your research on your own.
Then Franco and IEX interlinked the exchange asset,
the newcomer in the last 12 months.
They started in 2024, grew to 600 gig port capacity,
and quite in very last time,
so that's really exciting,
and brought the new fresh wind into Nuremberg.
A lot of technical stuff they've done,
RPKI services, road service, and so on,
and offering more service to the community,
that's what they plan in the next months.
RPKI IEX was also a newcomer to a three years ago already,
especially in Frankfurt.
They upgraded stuff in the direction to Amsterdam,
NTT Frankfurt is new, did a lot of automation,
and here, when you're getting bigger and bigger,
you need to start splitting metros, for example,
to do new renumbering, and they have some nice new Alistair switches,
and because they put so much information,
I made an exemption here and put a second slide for them,
because I find this tool here very, very cool.
Cleaning fibres is very, very important,
and if you, as an operator, ISP or IXP,
can support your clients with that,
I think that's a very nice idea,
and helps making interconnection cleaner.
(audience laughing)
Then Stuttgartaics had their 20 years anniversary party,
with it implemented the second course and the new site,
and the first branding in the history of Stuttgartaics,
and we are looking for more CDNs,
and especially a large German eyeball network.
With all that, I had the,
that was the specifics for the single IXPs,
I'm happy to take some questions,
and if you want to look on more details on the statistics,
you can look it online in the slides.
- Thank you, Tim.
(audience applauding)
- Please make yourself known if you have questions,
like wave.
- And if you look at bit six,
what happened to our information?
(audience laughing)
- That is correct, I didn't mention you.
Then you probably know your answers,
would you be so kind and state your answers
in the microphone, please?
- Well, one answer was already in the suggestions.
Use RC8950, we've implemented RC8950 support
on our route service,
and we implemented a translation device for that.
So if you're RC8950 only,
you can peer with legacy IPPs as well.
- Thank you, and sorry for missing your answer.
- And anyone else?
Three, two, one, okay.
I think we're good, thank you, Tim.
- Then, thank you, oil.
(audience applauding)
