API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93168
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-71798-inventing-the-wheel-network-orchestration-at-scale
Title: Inventing the wheel - Network Orchestration at scale

(upbeat music)
- Our first speaker is Tom Aikon.
Tom has been part of the networking industry
for the last decade or so.
And as he tells me, he keeps living on the bleeding edge.
This is what he will be talking about right now.
Welcome, Tom.
(audience applauding)
Hey folks, so inventing the wheel, I have a question for you.
Whoever reinvented the wheel.
Well, it seems at least somebody, but it's not invented here.
But sometimes you come to the situation where you see,
there is no wheel, there's no solution
which fits what you want to do.
, and I'm going to be a little bit more familiar.
I'm going to talk a little bit forward, what we want to change and how we want to change and why.
When a little bit about implementation, what we learned while trying to do that stuff.
And when also testing and all this pesky things you need,
if you are the biggest internet change in the world.
Nobody wants to be on the front page of highs with this guy took down the internet.
At least that's what I hope.
If you want to do that, we have job offerings open.
(audience laughing)
So let's have a look back.
2013, there was a denoc, and a colleague of mine was showing these slides.
It was the invention of what is known as D-Kix Apollon,
our wonderful platform which still survives till today.
Well, the world was a little bit different.
There were only two D-Kix locations, Frankfurt and New York.
There was no global spending network as we have today.
And people planned differently.
In 2013, before Apollon, we used scripts together with a database,
a file database like the Wipe database to configure the systems.
This was Perl, set and AWK.
And you could manage a whole internet exchange with that.
And yeah, nice thing, but it doesn't scale.
Well, when this Aikata-Lucin platform, known as Apollon, came,
and people said, "Okay, we can't do this with a file database anymore.
We can't copy and paste stuff manually, it doesn't make fun."
And people saw an opportunity, Aikata-Lucin at that time,
had a tool called Sam, the service-aware manager.
It's a big Java monster, but it could configure the devices.
And it had an API to the other side.
So people said, "Okay, we want to make our customer delivery faster.
We want to improve the experience.
Hey, let's use that tool."
And we came up with this design.
Well, we have some routers somewhere who would ex-guest.
This is NFMP, which is the new name for this old tool,
with our internal system called CWS, the central web service.
And, yeah, if you call somebody and you maybe got Gav on the phone or E1,
they would say, "Okay, we can do that stuff for you.
We go to this tool called Artemis, our internal tool,
and we're doing the configuration stuff."
And that was sending some calls to CWS.
CWS was doing some soap calls to NFMP,
and that one would then do as an MP called to the router.
Well, it worked, and it still works.
But time goes on.
This is the current architecture if you would use it as it is today.
It has grown.
At some point, people ask for a web portal,
"Hey, we want to do self-service."
At some point, we have those finance people.
Do you know finance people?
They want to have numbers, correct numbers.
And there was something big ERP doing crazy stuff,
but it wanted to have live data.
We went global.
It's a funny thing if you look at such a design.
At one point, what do you think was a unique identifier for a customer?
Of course, we are all peeping people.
It's a S number.
Well, that was before the globalization.
Now, one A S number can be a multitude of companies,
and things got more complex.
People started to build different tools.
You can see here what's called desire.
This was an approach to say, "Okay, let's reinvent everything."
But it never got to full fruition.
And it's still for some part there, for others, it's not.
And when people came around with such tools like Netbox or Notabot,
well, documentation beforehand was a media wiki.
Now, we're at some point, had, "Okay,
we have now some kind of structured data.
We all want to integrate with it.
How can we do that?"
And when we saw this, or thought, "Hmm,
can we do a drop-in for the NSP to get rid of the old part,
or do we want to do more?
Do we want to become better?"
And when we have looked at the architecture you have just seen,
and the whole operating support systems,
OSS, called Internally, has organic ground.
There have been tools added on, features added on.
So if you today order a direct cloud connect,
so a connection to a hyperscaler,
that is a child of what was VP in the early beginning.
But it had complete different requirements.
Only on the platform it was some kind of L2 transport.
Doesn't work.
Also, we have so many systems, and data was been duplicated.
We wanted to get away from that.
So we saw all of our systems need to be separated
for different parts.
There is no one system to rule them all,
because it doesn't work.
Also, we had some organizational changes.
In the old world, there was a software team,
which was doing all the software.
There were some network engineers doing the operation stuff.
There was a network design team doing the design.
And those three groups didn't really
play well with each other.
So we decided, OK, we want to change that.
And we went with an approach that we now have product teams.
There is now a team who is responsible for all the peering
related stuff.
There is now a team responsible for all the cloud stuff.
And there is a team responsible for all the access
related stuff, so the physical stuff.
And they do the whole stack.
They are responsible from the beginning of the portal
or the customer order until we can later
to get resolved to an intent what should happen.
So we organized our software also in that way.
And we found out, over a long time,
one big monolithic system doesn't work.
You can do that, you can buy that from different vendors.
There is a large monster, which surely do everything.
But it doesn't do.
It will not be flexible enough.
So we said, OK, let's have a certain look forward.
And then we had, OK, we want some goals.
What do we want to do with our new system
from what we learned over the last decade?
And the first one is, we want to have an open source system.
As an open, not as in free, don't misunderstand me.
You would have been happy to pay for a solution.
But if the vendor just gives you a big blob, you are alone.
If something goes wrong, you can open a support ticket.
And if you're lucky, somebody will come back weeks later
and tell you, oh, yes, you did something wrong.
But you can't look into the source code.
You can't fix stuff yourself, or even understand stuff yourself.
So we believed, if you want to have a new solution,
it needs to be open.
We need to have the control over the system,
and we must not rely on somebody else saying,
oh, yes, use it as it is, and hope
that our support will solve our problems.
Also, we wanted to have something which is not independent,
so the network operating system.
You can get a vendor solution, and they will tell you, yes,
we will support other vendors.
You just need to add some plug-ins to it.
Just write them yourself the API is open.
But if that goes wrong, which support team do you call?
Do you call the vendor who gave you the system?
We will tell you, yes, you're using our API one.
Are you talking to the north vendor saying,
hey, yes, we're sending this call, but it's not working?
They will tell you, yes, that's no developer stuff.
You can buy professional servers, we will help you.
So we said, OK, whatever we do, we want to be open.
We want to be able to use different platforms,
different versions, whatever comes around,
because this is a plan for the next 10 years.
We also wanted our service configuration intent-based.
So what is an intent?
Let me give you an example from D-Kix.
Somebody orders a peering, or a connection to a peering line.
The intent, then, which would go to the system, would be,
hey, please configure, port A, VLAN ID, C, this MAC address,
this IP addresses are assigned to the customer
and this is bandwidth.
In an abstract way, so with the product team,
who is responsible for that stuff,
doesn't need to care how the implementation of the device
looks.
That's not their part.
They should just say, OK, we went through the order,
we did all the business stuff, but the actual implementation,
I don't care.
I don't care if I need to do MAC filters, or IP filters,
or what cross-policy to set.
I have an intent, please do read for me,
and we wanted to decouple that.
Also, our base configuration must be completely generated.
I believe many of you do automation.
Who do full automation, so that the full configuration
of the device is auto-generated.
I see a very few hands.
That was one of our biggest goals, also, to say, OK,
we have this big platform where hundreds of routers
out there.
We cannot do manual configuration on all of them anymore.
Also, we wanted to have some more modern features.
So we said, OK, now we're doing SNMP.
SNMP has many shortcomings.
But one, for example, is it doesn't know about transactions.
If you need to change 10 things and to fail, well, good luck
finding out what failed and how you can fix it afterwards.
So we decided to go with Netcomf and Yang.
Netcomf is a protocol which is also
out there for some years now, which is enabling you
to use a programmatic way to talk to your devices.
And almost any vendor is already supporting that.
And Yang is a description language.
And also, it's vendor-independent description
language of the router configuration format.
So you can check early on, hey, is my configuration really
valid, at least syntactically.
And we said, OK, if you can, early on,
check that our configuration is valid.
And let's say there's a field which expects an IP address.
And we put in a MAC address there.
We want to see an early error.
And that is also what went in there.
And we said, OK, it needs to scale.
We have a network of hundreds of routers.
It will grow.
And with the existing solutions,
we didn't see a path forward how that can grow.
Yet, of course, you can now get a VM with 128 gigs of RAM
and more cores.
But at some point, there will be a limit.
And it doesn't go away.
Also, that's something for which people hate me.
We wanted to remove the administrative access
from users on the routers.
Some of you know me from earlier talks
where I shared my desk with Christian Kuntrop.
And he, at one time, said to me, you know,
if you need to use SSH, you should open a ticket
because either your automation or your monitoring is broken.
And that is a completely different concept than today.
Today, my colleagues are going on the routers,
doing manually changes if it's on the base context side.
And they're happy mistakes.
Sometimes it's just a typo.
Sometimes it's something which way
mangled up somewhere which came from different systems.
And we said, no, we don't want that anymore.
We want that our documentation is the same as a configuration.
There must be a far forward and backward.
And that only works if you remove the access
to the configuration.
Yet, of course, there are emergency measures and stuff
going on.
But in the default way of working,
people should not access directly on the router.
We wanted to have a clear separation of concerns.
So people should not be thinking about stuff
they do not need to think about.
If somebody is doing something on the peering site,
he should not care about the backbone site.
And the backbone folks should not care about the peering site.
But in the existing world, if we add a new router,
somebody from the peering site must say, OK, this VPLS
must be on that router.
And we go on there and we do stuff.
And the rollout teams, which we have,
have to think about it.
An absolute nightmare to do this organizationally.
And we also wanted to reduce our development dependencies.
So right now, in our old world, we
had this big monolith of software.
If the peering team changed something,
the other teams can't.
Or they shouldn't by our internal processes
because they have so often seen side effects if two people
work on the same code base and do a rollout at the same time.
So we asked ourselves, hey, how could an architecture look
which is ready for the future?
And then we came up with this architecture.
After that was the time.
We decided on a new idea to say, OK, for every product,
there should be a microservice, which
is managing all the details of the product.
And it shouldn't matter if our customer service, using
our internal Artemis tool, is accessing that.
Or if a customer, so you, are using our portal or API
to use the same features and the same possibilities.
Right now, we have some stuff, which you can't do as customer.
You need to call us.
And there's other stuff only US customers can do,
but not our customer service.
If you call us, what will they do?
Maybe they go to the portal and do the same stuff you would.
And that was also a certain nightmare.
We also said, OK, in the existing world,
everything was synchronous, which was a huge nightmare
for some colleagues.
Because if you did a change in Artemis,
you had to wait until it was done before the tool let you do
something else.
Sometimes we have changes which took a certain time
due to the architecture, and they were blocked.
Said, OK, we want to have a message bus.
So it's an asynchronous communication path
we have in between the different tools.
So we can say, hey, I have this intent.
Here's the intent, and please inform me when you're done.
But I'm not actively waiting or polling for that stuff.
On the other side of this message bus
is a network orchestrator, which takes data
from what is called the service repository, which
is basically all the customer-related intents are stored
in there after they have been implemented.
And also taking the data from our DKIMS,
our net box, in this case, and pulling those together
to create the full configuration of the device.
And that then gets pushed out to the platform.
So message buses, that is a complicated topic,
and people could talk hours about it.
But let's make it short.
It's an asynchronous architecture.
It's like a mailbox, you put something in,
and at some point you can pull it out.
And if it takes two days to pull it out,
it doesn't matter, it's still in there.
That gives us a non-blocking architecture,
so there can be hundreds of messages,
and we will work on them, but nothing is being blocked.
It's decoupling our teams.
This is a different defined interface
between different teams.
The intents can be exchanged.
There's no how we need to define a new protocol or stuff.
We have used Kafka for that.
And that gives us a certain flexibility between the teams.
Some teams are developing their stuff in PHP.
Java's are looking at Go.
My site is working in Python.
But we don't have any kind of issues there
because there is a defined interface.
Well, this is only part of the interface.
The other stuff we have is an abstraction layer,
which you call the product contract.
So if you have these intents,
you want to send them in between the different systems.
But how you define an intent,
and how do you check that it's valid?
For that, we'd use the tool of API contracts,
which is a definition of the API
and the methods you can send.
And it can show you a little bit how it looks.
I brought you on the left side
how a rendered contract partially looked,
because I was thinking about showing you
the actual source code, but forget it.
You wouldn't have seen anything.
And on the right side is how it would look
if you would send some data.
So in this, we have here a peering access service create,
as I said, with the intent.
Hey, I want to have a peering access service.
And it's having all the relevant data
so that the technical side can create this on the platform.
And it has all the data, it has a certain format.
So if you would send me something
where something would be missing,
or something would not fill the format,
you would get a rejection,
hey, you're not following the contract.
And this also gives us opportunities
because we can upgrade a contract.
We can have breaking and non-breaking changes,
and teams can work differently on that.
They only need to come once together to say, okay,
this is a new contract version.
Hey, it's a breaking thing, okay.
We need to update both sides at the same time,
but we can develop independent of each other.
Or if it's a non-breaking one, hey,
one team can start and the other can pull on later.
And that's what we have been doing for a whole time now,
where we always have this, okay,
we need to change something, hey, let's go on.
Okay, let's talk a little bit about implementation.
And I have thought for you.
Your DKIM is not better than any spreadsheet.
How many of you managed IP addresses
or information in spreadsheets, at some point in time?
- At some point, it's easier.
- Yeah, but then we got later on,
and we started having tools.
But are those tools better?
And I say no, and I want to give you a reason for that.
We have pain with data.
Data is only useful if the format is known.
For IP addresses, we learned, that is very, very easy.
But what about other data?
Humans must be guided.
If you take a tool like Netbox,
you could put in your device in multiple ways.
Hey, how do you model line cards?
How do you model optics?
How do you make sure that data fits together?
If you want to automate,
it always has to follow the same path.
Humans must be guided to do that,
and the tool doesn't do that by default.
Well, the DKIM doesn't help here.
It's just a tool, it's a database
where you can put in your data in any way you want.
So, what do you need to do?
Specify how your data should look like.
How is the line card modeled?
How is the module on the line card modeled?
How are power supplies modeled?
Most people don't care about that,
because they say I have my interfaces in here.
I manually configured the device, everything is fine.
Well, ensure that your data follows the guidelines.
Yes, they take ages.
But you must do that.
Otherwise, you will not be able to configure your stuff.
Well, yeah, spend weeks to fix data,
and then enforce that data follows your guideline.
And that's a pain point.
All the DKIMs usually don't have the right tooling to do that.
And it's really hard coding to do.
All this checks is the data following the guideline,
especially if you have dependent objects.
It's easy to ask, let's say, networks,
hey, put a ragax on this field.
Yeah, that's easy.
But do you can check,
hey, I want to put in a 100-key object.
Is this port a QSFP+ port which has enough power?
And what is the other ports around?
Do I have some kind of faceplate limits?
That's really painful.
Also in such projects,
of course, we have a human factor.
Maybe it's out of this project.
People were asking, why do I need to change my workflows?
It's working fine.
I'm doing copying paste from my text file.
Work fine for years.
It worked the last 15 years.
Yes, you're right.
Other people are asking, hey,
if you automate it away, that's my job.
I was saying it's too complicated.
Hey, I'm doing my conflict files all the years,
and now I need to use a tool.
I don't want to do that.
I was saying, hey, I'm the engineer.
I need full control.
I don't want this aid.
I can do it all on my own.
I was saying, hey,
I don't understand how all the parts are fitting together,
and you need to handle these problems.
Such a project is 90% human and politics,
not technology, if you are in a larger organization.
You need to start building partnerships.
You need to have ambassadors.
So in my team meetings,
I have from all relevant teams,
always somebody else from the teams coming in,
using our tools to see what's going on,
what's being developed,
because at some point you say, hey, I'm done,
and they never saw it.
So they can early give input.
And also do early on demonstration and trainings.
We always have reviews after a sprint that we talk,
talking to the people and saying, hey,
I'm showing you what we have here.
We have training stuff, and other stuff for that.
Okay, I see my time is currently running a little bit out,
so I will skip some parts.
Sorry for that.
Come on.
Let's talk a little bit about testing,
because I think that's a very important topic on this stuff.
People were saying there's no way you can be sure
that what you do is working.
And I was like, we have 100 routers out there.
Yes, of course, I cannot test that.
And when I said, okay, I have a shadow.
So we decided to have a de-kick shadow,
and that's a funny thing.
So our not assimilation framework exists.
So we can simulate our routers.
I think that many vendors have something like that.
But usually it's not really helpful,
because you get some kind of virtual box,
which is doing stuff.
We were lucky.
Nokia was having a solution
that you can really simulate the whole router.
With all its line cards, all its ports, all its stuff,
so I can put in a second system,
which looks exactly like the real world.
And yes, that's what we're doing.
We are simulating the whole de-kick networks.
Effectically, we are doing it two times.
There's a production shadow, and there's a staging shadow.
The production shadow is already running,
and everything you do today on our production platform
is simulated there.
So I could see early on, hey, do the API course work?
Is there something going on?
Is something breaking?
Also, we have hard software guidelines for our stuff.
We're using test-driven development,
so you usually write first a test
and then implement the code.
We have reviews.
We have massively reviews.
No code goes to production,
if at least not three engineers have looked at it.
And usually me, but I'm not a software human,
so I'm not like, yeah, it looks good.
And okay, something is weird.
We have quality frameworks around.
So we say, okay, whatever code goes out,
has to be tested, has to follow guidelines,
has to have a certain cognitive quality,
whether it's a measurement,
how complex certain parts of the code get,
and if I get too complex,
we need to change them.
And we have our smoke tests,
which means, okay, we test early on in our shadow,
does stuff work before it goes to production.
So usually, all of the stuff you do would do is run once
and verify it against the system that it works.
And of course, the shadow validation, which is running.
Okay, deployments.
Yes, we have deployed the first routers.
Ten nodes are already managed by our software.
The first adoption of a device was done
in a maintenance window.
All other adoptions, people were so confident
that said, okay, we do business hours.
There was no maintenance window,
no announcement, we just did it.
And it's fast, it takes about 10 minutes
to change the router from the old way
to be managed to the new one.
And all the other customer facing devices
will follow next year.
We will announce service windows for that
because there will be some changes
which are service-affecting, but that's the way of life.
Our results, we slashed the time for integration
of new nodes radically.
That was a week-long process before,
because every router had to be touched
and managed and stuff, and it's now minutes to do that.
We don't have any more incorrect configuration,
because some stuff was managed manually.
You don't want to know what I found out there
in the production network, and we're happy it's gone.
And the implementation speed.
We can now do new features within days.
And also the employee satisfaction is much higher,
because it's much easier to do stuff,
things cannot go wrong or less wrong than before,
and they have the confidence, hey, I'm doing the right thing.
Okay, one minute, 30, just one more thing.
We had to add a new product at some time,
and people were coming to me, hey, we have a customer,
he wanted to do 800g, can we do that?
Yeah, sure.
Well, there's no software release for that.
We don't have the optics.
And in two weeks, we have Denog.
Yeah, let's say the software release
was on the last day of October, 21 o'clock,
which was, I think, a Friday.
They also changed the young models.
The optics was special, and the software
didn't get the beta which was running on our shadow.
Well, I have one minute, let's just say.
On Friday, last week, DK is now awfully supporting
800g, that are plus.
So 800g, single lane, single fiber support.
If you have the demand for it, come to us,
you can get the highest speeds at our side.
(audience applauds)
And since I have 35 seconds left,
I'd say they skipped the Q&A.
You will find me on the social,
just look for the guy with the blue hair.
With another one, I've seen him, not him, meep.
(laughs)
And I'm happy to talk about it.
And thanks, and thank to you.
- Maybe we have time for one question
if I look at the clock, so is there somebody
who urgently wants to ask something?
Because if not, I have one question for you,
because we have a lot of people transitioning
from more traditional, artisanal networks,
where would you suggest them to start?
Because this is a huge endeavor.
What would be the first thing to look at?
- Try it out on a green field.
Start with something which is not important.
Use some tools like container labs, and just do it.
- Cool, thank you.
(audience applauds)
