API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93335
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-78243-you-can-t-just-model-a-train-in-netbox-about-architecting-and-running-modern-it-infrastructure-in-trains
Title: You can’t just model a train in Netbox: About Architecting and running modern IT Infrastructure in Trains

Okay, without further ado, the next topic is on something I've been told is very dear
to our community, because a good international friend of mine told me, how does it come that
the main topic on all of your social channels is Deutsche Bahn, what is going on there? And yeah,
we have Vanessa from DB Fanfak here. Apparently, you can't just model a train in that box. I don't
know why. Yeah, hi. Thanks for being here. As many of you may have experienced already a
conference is even better when there are talks about trains. So here you go. The Denog 17 train
talk, you can't just model a train in that box about architecting and running modern train
infrastructure in trains. But first, I want to get to know you and who I am. I've been as a
goer. I'm 27 years old and working as an IT infrastructure architect at DB Fanfak here. And why am I
I'm not here today. Most of you, I have one
infrastructure, relatively relaxed environment like a data center or an office building. That's
not what we are doing. And we have some challenges with it. And so, we want to do or we want
to explain you what our challenges are. And maybe there are some issues in the future if he's
understand the challenges of each of the operation model a little bit better.
Yeah, I'm also of course doing stuff. Besides in train IT, for example, teaching networking
basics at a cooperative state university but in Wittenberg, I think it's very correctly or
also stuff like nearly everyone does building experimental IPv6 only infrastructure in my
free time. Now, about you. Who of you arrived actually by train? Oh, that's very much it. Who
of you arrived by IAE or IC train? Still most of you? Well, that's nearly 100%. Yeah, nice.
Nice to see you. So, who of you did use the passenger information during the event? Okay,
not as much more of you newly going or just sitting into the train and hoping. Who of you
used the in-train Wi-Fi? Also a big part of you that's nice to see. So, we are talking
about how this works but to start we need to understand trains. Trains, how are they built?
In general, we have more or less three generations, three three models. Let's start with the
basic ones. We have locomotive and coaches. How they are connected, they have really basic
electrical connection with the UIC cable which from our perspective doesn't do much sophisticated
stuff. You have interesting features on that. Like site multiplexer-wend-a-took story. I'm not
going to translate that to English. You can look at all our Wikipedia how it works. But,
yeah, it's not really networking technology. It's like the basic safety critical technology.
Then we move forward to a so-called multiple unit or a German trip took. We have like the
first generation down here with a fixed power car and then some coaches but tightly connected
to each other. There we already have a train-wide bus or the train-wide network. For example,
the class 401, the ICE1. And then in a further development we go to the distributed power.
Fixed combination of vehicles with distributed power units or no dedicated power car anymore.
These of course also have train-wide buses or systems. But what all of these are together,
all these core functions like doors, like control that are considered like OT or embedded system.
From our perspective, you can think of it like embedded system or operational technology.
So why do we actually need IT and trains and how do we do it? Well, we have like two
worlds. On the right side you have really the safety critical functions. Like emergency
buttons or the loudspeakers or the door control. On the left side you have all the non-safety
critical comfort functions. Like our nice guy sitting there and looking at how fast are
we going, where we are, reading a newspaper or looking what is available in the board
restaurant to eat, what can I maybe even order directly. We have the passenger information.
And what we are actually doing, we are separating that. Because we don't want to get left side
to get in touch with the right side. And what we are today doing is focus on the left side,
the IT side. You may be, you could consider that as IT OT convergence. So it's like the
two worlds we are focusing on the IT world on the left side today. So to do some IT, we
of course need connectivity. Most of you have the easy connectivity. Like you have a fiber
connection or maybe a fixed DSL connection to a building. That's of course not working
for us. So how to connect the train to the internet actually. In general, it's what every
mobile connection basically is. Use the mobile networks. Use the 5G networks. But we have
also some challenges with that. We have like up to 320 kilometers an hour that we are running
with our trains and some challenging conditions. For example, we are warming between sales
and we are also doing that firstly. Maybe some of you came here from Frankfurt. There is the
Geney fast tracker cone, fast track between cone and the wine mine area. And there you
have a tunnel with maybe has a mobile cell and a bridge. And a few seconds later, next
tunnel. So this warming is already challenging. Then we have areas where we have low to no
care which at all. That's something we need to plan for. Then we have the point of international
usage. Our trains are not only running in Germany, also going to Switzerland, Austria,
Netherlands, Belgium, et cetera. So what is our solution? We aggregate everything possible.
So every possible connection. Multiple providers, for example. And we also need to plan for
instable or completely unavailable connectivity. That's not only relevant for the services
that are running on the train, but especially the operation of the infrastructure on the
train. So now we have connectivity on the train. How to get the connectivity to the customer.
In general, we have Wi-Fi on the train. That's nothing special from the layer 2, layer 3
perspective. Like it's just multiple access points connected to the same layer 2 network.
The interesting part is everything below it. Like the layer 1, the airf conditions. The
weighty frequency part. You have like a big metal pipe with access points in it. The
big metal pipe moveers. So also the relative position of the next coach to your coach moves
depending on if you're on a straight track or sitting in a groove, et cetera. You have
obviously issues that need to consider reflections. Like the signal-to-noise ratio. How high is
the access point coverage and visibility? Again, what I said. It changes all the time
if the next coach is moving in the -- yeah, before you. And then it changes relatively
quickly. You have dynamic interference. For example, in train stations. Two trains. Maybe
even off the same type. Sitting next to each other. Obviously, we behave much more dynamic
like an office building. Another challenge is the access point positioning. Of course,
ideal, like we all would build it with the access points and office building. We would
place it above the passengers, above the users. But the question in the train. Do I have space
there for access point antennas? Does it fit into the design? Is stuff like passenger
information? Monitor is still available. One of the possible solutions you see in the picture
on the white, like an enclosure under the roof, integrated with the design and place
that the passenger information is still visible. So, we have the connectivity on both sides.
But we need to distribute the traffic over the train. How do we do network and compute?
In general, the internet network also nothing special under the layer 2 layer 3 side around
here. We basically have a standard layer 2 network with STP based redundancy. Yes, I
know you're not really loving STP from the previous talk. But yeah, it just works. Usually
the network is per multiple unique. So, it means multiple vehicles that are fixed connected
to each other. There are not really fancy features like overlay networking EVP and layer 3 or
something like that. Most of the time, we're using a 10 gigabit projection backhaul for
most of you also borrowing probably. Yeah. What's important? Local management. Including
topology discovery. Because topology could be changing, we're covering that in the next
slide. So, important is we need to do everything locally. What's also interesting, usually
copper-based ethernet is easier to handle for us. Especially during maintenance, it's
just more robust than a fiber connection. And what's also like a special use case, we
have an passive layer 1 pass-through that connects the network in case of a power outage.
So, that's how a network could look, like two switches per course, each interconnected,
ethernet connects the backbone connections between the cultures. Yeah, that's basically
it's really nothing really special from the layer 2 layer 3 perspective. Obviously, we
need also local compute. Due to unstable connectivity, there's no other way than to have some local
compute available. You'd need like E&50, 155, 35 industrial hardware, we're using that
shell standard 68 hardware with Linux. And the main tasks are basically on the one side
to operational support for all the infrastructure running locally on the other side, providing
offline or at least cache services for every service that is available locally on a train.
So, what actually are we doing in terms of hardware and what's the challenge over here?
Well, we of course need industrial equipment. You can see an example on the right hand side.
What's unusual to most of you, we have M12 connectors instead of an air that shows 45,
like the standard copper ethernet you're probably used to. Also, power is a little bit different.
In trains, the 110-volt DC is nearly the standard, which obviously also changes a little bit,
maybe a little bit more than in the data center with really high-quality power supply. We don't
really have a standardized form factor we are using. Yeah, weight is really relevant. So, yeah,
that's, there's nothing like just by a 1-H-E19, so switch and place it into the WAG. There are
special certifications and regulations, so it's really difficult to find off-the-shave hardware,
especially from big vendors. The available hardware then often has a limited feature set,
compared to the data center infrastructure. It's more like the OT and operational technology
network hardware, and less the modern network backbone with maybe EVP and et cetera that were
used in data centers. And what's also important to maintenance aspect, the hardware needs to be
swappable by electricians really around the clock. When a drain comes into a workshop, there's
nothing like a network administrator, et cetera, available. We can do the hardware swag as well.
Some of you said in the workshops keep electricians away from network cables on Sunday. That's not
really an option here. And what we also need to do, of course, is automatic reconfiguration, in
case such as swap happens. So, how are we configuring and naming everything? Well, I've named a
slide many trains changing identities. Let's start from the big perspective. A multiple unit in
German trip is identified by its number. You see it on the top right. It's the 9478. In this case,
that's basically the whole group of the train. Then each unique vehicle has its own UIC or EVN
European vehicle number. You can see it on the picture on the bottom. And then we have like the
vehicle types, which is, you can think of it as a template, which defines what is in there.
And then we have like 50, maybe even 100 instances of this type. So, like a vehicle type. And then
we have recreate, let's say 90 vehicles, all with a custom UIC number out of that vehicle type.
All of that with everything I already said, the automation, the local
capability, et cetera. Another point is the vehicles in a multiple unit are sport between each other.
That's, I will go into detail in the next slide. You can imagine that like a little bit, you have
your data center fully equipped. You have one fully equipped track with, yeah, all your hardware,
your configured hardware. Then you're going into the data center, taking the rack out of it,
replacing it with an identical rack, but it has another number on it. And then you need to
integrate it all back into your network. So that's a really interesting use case for the traditional
tools and not really covered over there. So, it's not just easy to model a train in that box.
Yeah. How could such a swipe look? I have taken some real-world data from the ICE with the ID
or 304, 304. And that's the initial configuration. You see you have these three first cultures,
I think the left side is the end working first class, then the first class working, then the
this second class working between the first class and the bottom of some of you may know it.
And that's the initial configuration. But then something happens. And for some reason,
we need to exchange these two cultures. I go back and forth. So, if you have a look, we have
404 at the beginning and 104 at the beginning. And then we take some other ones. They have the
same hardware built in, but they are other cultures. And in this case, that could happen at night
or something. We automatically need to discover that and reconfigure all the network. So that's
obviously a challenge we need to take account for. So in order that we have named and identified
everything, let's go on how to build and operate the infrastructure. Yeah. The first problem is
lifecycle. A train usually lives for about 30 years. Large redesign usually at half lifetime,
so after 15 years, you already see this lifecycle is completely uncomfortable with our
used hardware with a little bit shorter expected life, similarly. So when to upgrade, of course,
new generations, new architectures, introduces new variances. The in-plane, in-place maintenance,
so swapping hardware with the same model is not really a big problem. It happens all the time
around the clock when the train comes into the workshop, which, of course, also means we don't
have the easy maintenance windows, like it just happens every time. But the important question
when to redesign the hardware architecture, how long does the world all take? It's much longer
than most of you are probably used to. Multiple year world all period for such changes as usual.
I have an ICE-1 in the example. The ICE-1 has currently a second redesign. It was built in 1988
to 1990, 1939. Yeah. The second redesign started 2020, including, of course, newer IT,
and is approximately finished in next year, 2026. So you see, this lifetime alone for this change
is really, really long to, yeah, what would you probably use in a data center world?
Then management. Yeah. It's nothing unusual to like have two sides, to have a data center
inventory management, an IPAM system, more or less than for monitoring, but expecting stable
connectivity between all of that. Between your monitoring, your exploration, your inventory,
and your sites where the hardware is actually deployed. That's nothing we can do. We expect
unreliable connections all the time. So we basically need to have a local copy, a local mirror,
of all of that we have seen right now. That also does mean cloud only management is not really
possible for us. We need some type, at least, of local management, just because we expect to
have no cloud connection when we drive to a certain area or something like that.
In summary, running modern IT infrastructure and drains is, of course, possible as you have heard.
It introduces new challenges, especially compared to the data center infrastructure.
You need to keep in mind the number of drains and the flexibility. You need to maintain the
flexibility. You need just automatic reconfiguration. The life cycle and the hardware swaps are much
more complicated than planning a data center change. The flexibility and the mode of instances is,
of course, difficult, with normal, with traditional tooling. You will never have a really stable
connection. Like, independent of what you're doing, expect your internet connection to be gone.
Yeah, and everything around hardware is especially challenging. Like, what hardware is available,
the sizing of the hardware, the life cycle, the maintenance of the hardware needs to be doable.
You need to find space for the hardware. You need to power the hardware.
Heat dissipation is also a team. Interesting use case, and especially with the hardware.
That's the end of my slides. I want to thank you for being here. I want to thank my team for
the support of these slides and obviously the Denog team for making all this possible.
With this nice picture of the ICU, you now now trip through or multiple units,
94, 88, driving into the night and cars. I want to wish you a safe journey back home with a stop
into the closing. Thank you very much. Okay, questions. Now is your chance. Here we go.
Hello, Q here and noted other train that. So, question about what happens when there are
two trains that are coupled or uncoupled? Obviously, like, the train control networks need to be
connected when a train is coupled. But is the infotainment, so to say network, then also coupled,
or do they just maintain themselves apart? It's just like a separate train with the network,
like we are doing it all the way around together. Yeah, of course. There's nothing happening on
the side. Okay. If you already have questions, make yourself known, here. Hi, Nicolas Cotton,
speaking for myself. Are you evaluating the usage of satellite communications for
uplink connectivity in the trains to compensate the poor network coverage we have in some parts of
Germany? There's actually nothing I know anything in detail about. Sorry. Okay, thank you. Hi,
Gareem from, of course, interesting talk. I was just wondering, do you have content caches for
Netflix and stuff like that? Not that I know of, if you have a CDN and a good idea about that
can't talk to me afterwards. Fradio Finite 7, are you using Wi-Fi in the workshops to connect the
trains? Yeah, I was also saying the workshops, that's not my special area, but the connectivity
for the train itself, it's mobile networks, what I have on this slide earlier. Hello, Francisco,
here. You mentioned the train carriages get swapped. How often does that happen per train set per
month, roughly? I wouldn't say not so often, I don't have any data on that, but it's like more,
it's only when it's really necessary. We must prepare for it, but it's not nothing like that
happens on a daily basis. Mark Haber, Freelance IT consultant, you might know me as Succchloos.
The class 4, 12 has 13 cars. The Holgo ICEL has 17 cars. I think you have two switches per car,
so that makes well beyond 30 switches in a single spanning tree domain. How did you manage to get
that to work reliably? That's a good question. I just can't say that it apparently works.
Hi, Nicolas, speaking for myself, since the ICE Media Portal also has video streaming on it,
and it seems like those videos are on train. How do you feed those videos onto the train? Do you
do a nightly r-sync over the mobile network? We are doing over the air, of course, like everyone
does, but we are just expecting unstable connectivity for that.
Hi, Sebastian, also speaking for myself, you told us that when you swap trains,
the network needs to reconfigure what kind of reconfiguration are we talking about? Is it
like renumbering IPs? What needs to happen in the network if a train gets swapped?
It's too complicated for the question, but at least we need to change, like to identify as the
UIC numbers everywhere they are used. That's like the minimum set that needs to happen.
Hi, Rose, speaking for myself, you mentioned the different classes of trains. For example,
the ICE 3 new 4-0-8 or the new ICE-L have laser-cut windows so your mobile phones can connect to
the outside world easier. Is that something you are working on? Because for the moment,
when you want to have information about how fast your train is, connections, or if you want to
order something from the Bot Bistro in first class, you are only able to do it via Wi-Fi on ICE.
With those laser-cut windows, that's something in the future you are looking into with outside
connection to those information and entertainment systems. That's an interesting question and
probably the idea behind it, but now currently that's like he choose to use a mobile or the
on-train infrastructure to completely support world.
And regroup back. B6, have you enabled IPv6 and do you have plans to enable IPv6?
To be honest, I have expected a question much more earlier.
It's like only the fourth time this dinner I was asked that. Who of you has the same question?
Okay, that's not really much of you. It's of course not really easy to roll out IPv6 there.
There are talks about it on that event here too. So yeah, it's not that he just flipped the switch
and then it's working, you need much more consideration. Obviously also the user demand for it to do
etc. That's why I was asking. Yeah, we are talking about it. But as you know, sometimes IPv6
architecture plans etc is difficult. It's complicated. I think we have room for one more question
there and then I would suggest we will cut the queue. Already, please, people move to the inside.
If you're sitting on the edge, please, people will come in.
Hi, I'm Marcus, a personal question. Is there any way you can increase the MDU on the Wi-Fi
and the trains? Maybe 1500?
Probably the same answer as the IPv6 question. It's complicated, applies here.
Okay, with that, thank you very, very much. Thank you.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
