API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93149
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-75886-what-can-possibly-go-wrong-stories-of-peculiarities-of-modern-server-hardware
Title: "What can possibly go wrong?" Stories of peculiarities of modern server hardware

(upbeat music)
Okay, so our next presenter is Vladimir.
Vladimir has over 15 years experience
in SRE, DevOps, Susset Man and Suss Engineering.
He's currently working with NVIDIA.
However, he has always been passionate
about working with hardware.
Networking this copy.
And you sometimes see things that other people miss.
So please join me in welcoming Vladimir to the stage
and enjoy the talk.
[APPLAUSE]
So yeah, before I kind of start, there
are important disclaimers.
I work as an AI infrastructure engineer
to NVIDIA since September this year.
[inaudible]
[inaudible]
generate more than a billion packets per second to stress test various things.
And after that, I had a lot of questions
about why exactly I built the systems like that.
What about the test targets?
Like, I mean, in this case, VPP box.
Like, why I configure it that way.
And basically, what happened-- I decided
to show what happens if you do some very common misconfigurations
of the hardware so that people would know what to look for
and what to aim for. Well, as like I got already introduced, mostly so I live in Switzerland.
Yeah, I have a lot of background in SRE, CSENGE kind of stuff. And I got in all of this
project basically in 2021 when I got myself a 25 gigabit home internet. And for that,
I decided to build a fast router. Therefore, I went with VPP. I met with PIM-1-PELTS, who
is known very well for all kind of VPP testing and everything. And we started talking and
it was like passionate for hardware. I have not a lot of knowledge about networking in
general. But I really like complex problems, performance testing, and everything around
that. And that comes into building all of those machines. So, in contrary, it's really
what I talked about the cost-effective setup like other talks. This one will be specifically
over-built and over-powerful because I want to showcase problems that you can get. And
for that, I want the hardware not to be the problem. So, by itself. So, yeah, if you
want the cost-effective part, yeah, this is not about it. Yeah. So, for the VPP, you
know, VPP box, that's basically what I went with. There are some limitations because
it's home project and hobby project and I'm spending my own money on that. Yeah. Like,
I went for everything that you can find on relatively cheap scale or like I didn't
have a lot of choice in the hardware that I can get. So, like the CPU, for example,
supports faster RAM, but unfortunately I couldn't get motherboards for like within the price
range I was looking at that can actually do that. And the mixture of network cards is also
because of that, because I buy whatever I can find cheap on some deals or anything. And same
goes for the low generator boxes. I went for two overpowered boxes. Actually, like the first
one, like if you put more network cards in there and maybe like double the course, it should be
fast enough to saturate the VPP test machine. But for this particular test, I went for like way
overpowered setup. And again, hobby project limitation, like for example, Zn5 have 12 memory
channels, but the motherboard I got only have eight. So, it's just physical limitation of the
box that I have. And that unfortunately will be important later. Yeah. But no, let's actually
break some things. And before that, we should establish some sort of baseline. We should actually
see what the box is capable of. So, like a small disclaimer, I will be showing some graphs,
like Grafana screenshots or screenshots from the software. Don't try to read them. I will try to
zoom in into the important parts because they are very information dense, unfortunately. And
not very readable from the slides. So, yeah, that's basically the Grafana screenshot. And what's
important here is that this is the VPP. Like I went for a simple L2 packet forwarding. Like the
box can actually forward more than one billion packets per second. It's like 1.15. In this case,
very stable. Like rather reliable. And another important thing is, like, so if you look at the
thread utilization, there is nothing even remotely close to 100%. So, if you would want to go for
MPLS forwarding, it can do that. And for that, actually, as far as I remember, PM did talk on
last-denog, like showcasing the previous version of the same box, like doing his setup of the VPP.
Yeah. And for the configuration part, like, I put eight cores for Connect X6s per port.
I put like eight queues, like, so one core per queue. And like, for Connect X7, I could go down to
four because for them, I haven't noticed any significant difference in terms of the performance.
But for Connect X6, it was rather important. And in terms of the bandwidth and throughput,
like, I can get almost up to 1.3 terabits with large enough packets. So, the previous results
were with 64 byte packets. This one is, like, with one kilobytes. I mean, if you can do a billion
packets of 64 bytes, you probably should consider it with large enough packets. Your network.
So, let's actually start breaking things. So, imagine you got this, like, nice, brand-new,
Emerald Rapids machine. You put the software there. You just, like, put everything in configuration.
You assign maximum amount, of course, you can think of or, and just start VPP. That should work,
right? And, of course, it doesn't. This is actually, like, I think, the only kind of software problem
that I will showcase here. So, if you try to start VPP out of the box, it will start complaining
that maximum amount of workers that it can support is 64. And you have, like, amount of course plus
extra, like, service stuff workers instead. If you would search for the error message,
you can find that, actually, since forever they have hard-coded limitation of 64 workers,
that is not easily configurable. You need to, like, actually go and change the define, like,
one single line of code to make it work. Back in January, I made a small patch that makes this
configurable. But then we had, like, entered some discussions that probably this limitation
shouldn't be even there. But then we need to understand what was original intention of this.
And this is, like, this line of code is, in the very first commit, is still there.
So, that's a little bit beyond of my understanding of VPP code base. Therefore, the patch is not
merged, but it works. So, in all future scenarios, I will be using the patched version to just work
around the limitation. So, like, we fixed that. We started connecting our network cards. So,
my motherboards, like, simplified schema, like, I have two CPUs. Like, I have PCI express slots
that are numbered from, like, one to six in this particular way. So, I just decided, like, connect,
so then the work cards one to one. So, like, from one to two, three to four, five to six.
That should be your key, right? And, of course, it's not. So, on the left side, you can see our,
like, ideal case. On the right side, you see, like, what you will get if you do exactly like this on
this setup. Like, it's not too bad. So, for most people, I think, probably, they will be just
saying, like, oh, it's good enough. But it's not the best results you can get. You lost roughly,
like, 150, 170 mega packets per second of forwarding performance. And the question is, why?
You probably would, like, so, next, you would probably go to the motherboard manual and you quickly
figure out that the distribution of the PCI slots to the CPU is actually completely, yeah, I have
no idea, like, I'm not an electrical engineer, maybe from their perspective, if it makes sense,
from my perspective, no. Yeah. And, basically, I accidentally, accidentally, in this case,
connected them in the worst possible way. So, each packet now goes to the CPU one, like, or CPU zero,
then goes to the other CPU to be processed and sent out. So, then, you might think that, like,
if you remember or know from top of your head the schema for emerald rapids, you would actually
know that those have three socket links, like 20 giga transfers per second each direction.
So, it's 120 gigabytes per second of total bandwidth between sockets. With 64 bytes packets,
you have roughly 70. So, that shouldn't be the problem. So, the question is, why? Again,
worrying, like, there will be extremely dense screenshots, which I will quickly zoom to the
correct, like, part. So, if you will start digging around, you will find a lot of tools, like, so,
Intel provides some open source tools, like, PCM for performance counters, monitors, and one
particular tool actually shows the difference. That is actually the cross socket bandwidth. So,
if you would zoom in, you will see that, again, in our ideal case on the left, you will see,
there's, basically, no memory communication. Like, half a gigabyte per second is, basically,
nothing. Yeah. So, like, on the right, okay, so, like, on the right screen shot, you will see that
there is actually heavy memory throughput. So, like, there is almost 120 gigabytes of total,
like, read and write combined. You might maybe think that that's a mistake, but it's actually not.
That's exactly, like, the left screen shot is exactly what you want to achieve for this particular
use case. And modern CPUs are complex. There are a bunch of optimizations. And in this particular
case, this one is called the direct I/O access, so, which Intel supports since, I think, IV
bridging from 2014, 2013, something like that. So, which allow, so, in the classical schema,
you will see, so, your traffic goes from network card, then it goes to the PCI root complex, then,
it sends it to ram, then the CPU actually reads it through the L3 cache from the ram.
This, like, approach allows you to bypass the ram itself. So, like, MD have also a very similar
feature called SDCI. It's actually smarter, but they only support this since then 5 and only on
epics. And they approach because it's smart, unfortunately, requires the software and firmware
support, which, like, for none of my hardware, I had any firmware that supports SDCI. So,
unfortunately, I cannot really test or verify that. But, yeah, like, if you would want to read
more, like, I put on the slides a couple of more links for, like, one of the using stocks and for
input documentation, which have way more information than you ever need about this.
So, then, like, if you would start looking into more diagrams, then you would see that modern
CPUs are way more complex than they used to be. Like, long time ago, your CPU was basically a
uniform set of cores, which have, like, which are on a ring bus or on a mesh. But, it's no longer
the case. Emerald Rapids, so fire rapids, granite rapids from Intel, where, like, all of them
from AMD, they are no longer uniform. It's extremely hard to figure out what exactly are
the limitations or implications of that, because, like, Intel published very detailed documentation
about subfire rapids. I wasn't able to find the same level of details for emerald rapids, for example,
and neither idea from four granite rapids. So, like, from various public sources, I tried to
create just a simplified version of diagram, the chokis, only the important parts for the talk.
So, you now have multiple chiplets, which have cores, which are somehow connected with each other.
And each chiplet for Intel have their own PCI root complex, and for subfire rapids, it's four chiplets
for emerald rapids, they moved to two. So, the next idea to test, like, so let's see what will
happen if we would explicitly misplace our threads and, like, so talk to the PCI devices
connected to the other chiplet, because, unfortunately, my motherboard only exposes PCI slots from
one chiplet. So, again, limitations of the hobby hardware.
So, what I did, I explicitly pinned all the threads to the other chiplet other side. So,
now, like, we will go through the interconnect between the CPUs. Oh, and maybe one take away from
that part that, like, I would really like you all to think about modern CPUs, more in the sense of
data center, I guess, networking, because it's all have buses, it's all have all limitations,
it's like, these concepts are basically the same, they're just, like, in a way smaller scale.
Yeah, and, again, like, if you would run this, you would see, basically, that performance
haven't changed a lot. There is, like, it's, it became slightly less stable, in that sense.
And the main change is actually CPU utilization. If you would remember going back in slides,
back in time in the slides, there was no thread that was consuming too much CPU. In this case,
there's a couple of threads that are very close to consuming, like, 90-ish percent of CPU. So,
for L2, that didn't matter. It's, like, the performance impact was roughly, like, one or two
percent at most. If I would start adding more features, like, do any extra processing,
that will become the problem in this case. And that all happens when you are misplacing the threads
on the different die, on the different chiplet. So, basically, this is probably the case where
the latency actually starts impacting the throughput, because my tests are significantly throughput
optimized. Now, what about the FX CPUs? So, AMD have completely different approach
to emerald rapids of fire rapids. They are way more similar with granite rapids.
So, they have dedicated die that handles all the IO, all the memory, all the PCIe, everything.
And they have multiple chiplets with cores, 8 or 16 cores per chiplet. Nowadays, at least,
with, like, shared L3 cache and so on. So, let's try to look into that.
So, like, the tool that allows you to pick into the whole thing is, like, the main one is LSTOPO,
if you enable all the knobs in the BIOS to expose the topology as the Numa node,
you can actually see that the CPU consists of four Numa nodes. I cut the screenshot,
so I cut the information that's not really interesting here. But, yeah, you have definitely
four Numa nodes that you can visibly see. If you start looking inside, you'll see multiple CPU dies.
Each one have their own L3 cache. Like, you will know the size of the cache, you know,
which cores belong to each die, and then you have all your PCIe express devices that connect to this
particular sub Numa cluster, like AMD calls them in PS Numa per socket, like the switch.
It's notoriously hard to find any detailed diagrams about the AMD machines,
like, and you cannot easily reference their documentation because of, like, various legal
reasons, as far as I understand, they have, like, very interesting idea of how you can quote the
setup, like, how you can pull them, like, locating slides and everything. So, I try to find
as much information as I could, and that's, yeah, unfortunately, leads me to, like, rather,
outdated diagram about them, too. But what you can take away from that is, you have multiple dies
that are connected to some boss that then connects to the, some portion of your IO die, and, therefore,
there's all of those kinds of implications that you potentially, I think, would be there.
So, you have, so they call their boss infinity fabric. So, you have the, like, infinity fabric
link from the dies, from the chiplets to the IO die. You have something inside, and, like,
that actual debt inside is, unfortunately, very interesting, but I haven't found any public source
of information about that. So, yeah, the question is, would it actually matter for my test setup,
for, either, for forwarding or for traffic generation? And the answer is surprisingly no.
For this particular case, it won't matter because traffic generation is heavily through put
bound, and if you would do simple calculations on how fast the fabric is, you will have, like,
all kinds of details, so this is public information from their, like, slides and specs.
You have, like, 32 bytes per cycle read, 16 bytes per cycle, right? You have, like, the clock,
the frequency is roughly 2 gigahertz. So, if you do some math, you will have, basically, 64 gigabytes
per core cluster with a narrow setup, and they have also CPUs with two links, so double that.
Basically, it gives you at least 120 gigabytes of link speed for the PSA root complex,
because you can probably assume that it won't be, like, so it won't be narrower than the links
from the, from the chiplet to the I/O die. My total traffic generation capacity,
even in throughput mode, is, like, one, I mean, 1.4 terabytes theoretical, so 175 gigabytes per
second total, so, basically, two, two number nodes will be able to easily handle that.
So, like, I could have potentially, so, like, potentially, it would matter if you would go for,
for, for modern 400 gigahertz network cards, if you put bunch of SSDs, like, PSA, Gen5 SSDs,
and you will start doing something CDN-style workloads, if you will start sending your files
from disk to network, then you actually will be, will probably will be able to saturate the fabric.
Unfortunately, I don't have enough network cards to simulate that behavior.
So, yeah. And, yeah. For VPP, it won't actually matter that much, because, like, as I said earlier,
I wouldn't be able to test their, like, SDCI, so, like, their technology to bypass the RAM,
because none of my hardware supports that. And with that, I will be bound by amount of memory
channels. So, like, I actually did the tests outside. I did not include the slides at all,
because it shows, basically, very similar numbers to what I achieved on the Intel when I
did the cross-socket communication. The performance figures were very similar to that.
So, like, and if, yeah. So, basically, the conclusions is, well, I need more hardware,
which, I guess, my family won't appreciate. Yeah. So, yeah, but, like, seriously, like, if you
want to take, like, one single point that was important about this, that you always should verify
all the assumptions about the hardware structure. The vendors, like, so, the server vendors or
motherboard vendors, they know all of these details. They are sometimes very hard to find,
or, in some cases, like, distribution across the chiplets, for some reason, they don't publish
that. They don't really like to expose that. And you basically need to always consult, like,
try to get this information from the vendor before getting the hardware, before you ask them to
configure it for you. And, yeah, like, if you cannot just verify and, yeah, run the test yourself,
try to get the topology, like, open source tools are there. Each vendor also have their own set of
tooling, which, like, also expose various different subset of this information, like, in
some nice ways to, that you can read and so on. So, yeah. Thank you for your time on the questions.
Thank you for these insights into networking and CPUs. Some interesting topics here,
and maybe there are some questions in the room. Anyone? Okay. You have to process these things,
I think. I'm going to say anything, and when are those now questions? So, thank you very much again.
And then...
