API URL: https://media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93238
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/denog17-79498-the-return-of-egp-or-the-curious-case-of-the-bgp-origin-attribute
Title: The return of EGP or the curious case of the BGP Origin attribute

(upbeat music)
- Our first presentation today is Wolfgang.
Wolfgang is from Decakes and I think everyone knows
that he loves BGP and this time he only has 10 minutes.
So let's go.
- All right, let's get started.
Let's get started.
Good morning, I'm Wolfgang and spoiler alert,
This talk does not answer any question.
it merely raises a question to perhaps some of you have the answer to.
It's the slide I used to have in my workshops all the time.
A rich in type, I say it's a historical attribute.
A rich in type tells BGP how the prefix was injected into BGP.
It has three possible values.
One is IGP, that means the prefix came in via a so-called network statement.
The next one is EGP, EGP stands for exterior gateway protocol.
the
In complete means the prefix was
imported from some other routing
protocol into BGP that can be a static route.
It can be OSPF.
It can be ISIS.
It can be anything.
And because BGP doesn't know what it really was,
it is often used as a question mark in the table.
And I always used to say this rule isn't really important.
Because nobody cares about it.
The originator, the autonomous system injecting,
the prefix is setting that and nobody looks at it, nobody cares.
And in the preparation of this year's workshop,
I had a look, as I always do, at the global routing table.
And I found this.
I had a look at the origin type.
And I really found a number of prefixes marked with an E in the global routing table.
And like I said, E stands for EGP.
So if somebody out there using EGP again, I really doubt that.
I found over 900 prefixes in the IPv4 table.
I found 62 prefixes in the IPv6 table.
So EGP and IPv6, not really.
So who's doing that and why?
In IPv4, I found 118 different AS's originating prefixes with the origin type of EGP.
In IPv6, I found 19 different AS's.
And keep in mind, I have a small stub AS behind the D-Kix main AS.
I appear at a lot of IXPs, but I really have only a small autonomous system.
So if you, in your AS, look at your routing table from your point of view,
the results might be different.
Highlights, Google announces 348 IPv4 prefixes with marked as origin type EGP.
I tried to find someone in Google who gives me an answer, but I couldn't find anybody.
Second one, also Google, third one, somebody called Hive Logic.
And this would be my question when I'm finished to the audience if you have any clue what
is happening there.
I don't know.
Please don't give me your best guessing.
I can do myself.
So later on, if somebody really knows why somebody is marking their prefixes with EGP,
let me know.
Okay.
Yeah, an IPv6, we have again Google and we also have Hive Logic.
I'm sorry, I already said that.
Now, another thing, getting mixed messages.
Like I said, the origin type is set by the originator, by the autonomous system injecting
a prefix into BGP.
And if you read the RFC about BGP, it says the origin type should not be changed by any
autonomous system forwarding the prefix.
But somebody does.
I found this prefix here, somebody changed the attribute on the way.
There is an I here.
It's EGP because that's what I was looking for, but somebody changed it to IGP.
And keep in mind the best pass selection, it says IGP over EGP over incomplete.
So somebody wants to attract more traffic.
And this is right of the BGP dirty tricks department.
If local preference and AS pass are equal, the one who changed the attribute attracts
more traffic.
So if you have more than two transit providers and you set the same local preference on your
router to all of them, and you receive the same prefixes, of course, from all your transit
providers with the same AS pass length, which is quite likely.
And the one who rewrites origin type to IGP gets more traffic.
Yeah.
At right 91, there was a fantastic presentation by James Bensley.
I don't know if James here today.
Yeah.
He's sitting here and I'm using his slide with permission.
And he found out which tier ones actively rewrites the origin type to IGP to attract
more traffic.
So BGP dirty tricks department.
Countermeasures or should I even care?
Well, if you are a leave AS, a stop AS, a simple customer with two or more transit providers
and one of you is playing dirty tricks, perhaps you should care.
Talk to them.
Talk to their sales.
Tell them this is against RFC of BGP.
They won't listen to you.
Forget it.
But what can you do?
Well, if you are a stop AS and I think the origin type has lost its meaning.
It was intended that the originator can set that to distinguish between different sources
of prefixes and then it simply passed on through the announcements.
But nowadays, if anybody can re-write it and use it for these dirty tricks, it has lost
its meaning.
I checked if the BGP best pass evaluation, if you simply can turn it off, I didn't found
any implementation where you can turn it off.
Strangely enough, you can turn off AS pass length stacking but not the origin type.
So if you have more than two BGP transit providers and no BGP customers, what you can
do is you can simply re-write it yourself, re-write it to IGP and whatever your upstream
provider does, you don't care anymore.
If you have BGP customers, you perhaps should not do that if they have another transit provider
because then you would be one playing the dirty tricks yourself as well.
So that's it for today from me.
And like I said, I raised the question, why would anybody mark a prefix being injected
from EGP?
So if anybody of you knows, let me know.
Thank you.
And actually, we were good in time, so if anyone knows, anyone wants to say something
very quick?
Any questions?
Okay, make it very quick.
Thank you.
That's actually not on the EGP issue, but just first of all thanks for presenting, raising
the awareness of this issue that people are doing dirty tricks.
I think not enough people know about it.
So thank you, Wolfgang, it's a good presentation.
And also just to say that this is not the only dirty trick that your transit providers
are playing.
You should look very, very careful into your table.
I'm not sure I can say it on the record, but if you want to have a chat later on, there
are more dirty tricks being played that you should maybe be aware of.
Thank you.
Thank you, Wolfgang.
