API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93435
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/godotfest2025-shipping-godot-from-build-to-player
Title: Shipping Godot: From Build to Player

(soft music)
- Good morning, everyone.
I hope you had an amazing last day at Godokan,
or like yesterday at Godokan that you met amazing people
that you got to know new friends, old friends,
and of course, got together and get to know each other
way better than before.
A few corporations, maybe, like corporations,
maybe come from that.
And we are really happy to have you here,
and that you join our publishing panel
for Godot shipping, Godot from built to player,
or to the player.
We have our panelists today at the stage,
and I will introduce them in a second.
And their experts in their field and different segments,
they have different views of everything
and different, like, made different experience.
So it's super exciting to see what you've used
on certain topics, but I will introduce each
and everyone with you slowly with a question,
but first of all, what is the default platform
to ship your game in this year?
- Hi, so today I introduced myself before.
- Yes, please.
- I'm Pablo Navarro, and I publish games
for Nintendo Switch, so that's my answer.
Nintendo Switch is my only target.
- Hi, I'm not gonna eat the mic.
I'm Joseph Hill, I'm with Zago,
and we publish to Apple platform,
so primarily iOS and iPadOS.
- I'm Dom, I work for Crazy Games,
we're a big web portal, so my answer is,
you published the web.
- Yeah, I'm Paul, I'm a chasing carrots,
I'm a game designer and programmer,
and we publish mostly to Steam, PC, and Linux,
and two weeks ago we also shipped on PS5 and Xbox.
- So we have basically expertise here from the web
to mobile, to Steam, to console, or like Nintendo
and this particular case,
you had a great talk yesterday about your Switch game
and how to basically port a game
and release it on Nintendo Switch,
so let me ask you, what makes a game console ready?
- Well, it has to be really polished.
Really polished, book free, really appealing,
really appealing because consoles are not,
every game should be appealing after the third
for a commercial release on any platform,
but sometimes you will be able to find in another platform
that the games are not appealing,
not ready for a commercial release,
but still I'll release, well,
it has to be really optimized on the other side
for being able to work and run smoothly,
well, appealing, I would say appealing.
- Isn't every game kind of trying to be appealing,
and I mean, we have a lot of indices here in the audience,
is like console, even a consideration for an indie team
that might be starting out,
like for a smaller indie team would go down?
- Definitely, definitely because I don't understand Steam,
I currently don't understand Steam in the sense of,
I try to sell some games on Steam,
and it's a broken system, in my opinion, in the sense.
There's no way to stand out there on even the streets.
You have, it's also crowded,
but you have a few more opportunities there.
- I mean, Paul, you just released a game on Steam
and that was pretty successful,
like what would you say about it?
- I mean, we released a couple of games on Steam
and this was the first really successful one for us.
So we had also failures, we've seen this,
and we interact much more with Steam,
and I wouldn't agree with you with your,
there are certain rules that you can learn
about the ecosystem and there are good reasons
why some games stand out on Steam and some don't,
and most of it is basically also is talking
about the appeal of the game.
I don't think that's a platform independent feature
of a game being appealing.
It's more of a player facing attribute of games, the appeal.
Sure, there are games that fit better on the Switch,
for example, if our game, "Holes of Town"
would make a great fit on the Switch, I think.
Problem is, I've given a talk about performance yesterday
and we didn't get the performance up to a point
where it would perform well and Switch,
that's why it's not released on Switch.
But on other consoles, it does,
and on other consoles, like PS5 or Xbox,
it's a little bit more difficult for indies.
I, we believe, because the Switch has a little bit more,
has a different audience, basically, you know.
And yeah, Steam, I would say,
if you spend some time on Steam there,
you learn certain dynamics,
and also you learn from through the backend
and through how you interact with the store,
how Steam promotes games.
And actually, Steam has a way of showing good games
to the right audience, and they improve on that as well.
But it's often a question about validating your ideas
before you kind of get out with them,
and I guess your game took quite a while
to get to where it is to be shippable and everything.
We have, like, basically, I wouldn't call it opposite,
but it's definitely a way to verify ideas to ship fast.
And like, why not go to web as like a platform
or mobile in that sense, to be ready, faster,
to be seeing more players, because, like, Steam,
you have to have a finished product,
or a product that's quite fun development,
to start to verify it, you can make a whole game
for a web in that time, I assume.
- Yes, we find that a lot of projects
that are kind of three to six months
work really well on the web.
Short of time frames are preferable, I think.
Just because it costs less,
it's less of an investment,
you get the feedback much quicker,
and then you can kind of update it and build on it.
But for the most part, like, shorter projects
are really, really good on web,
and they still perform, they still make money.
- You know, Hot of Tormen, in that case, is a RPG,
like, is there, like, a yes and no for, like,
web games specifically, where you say, like,
that works, that doesn't work at all?
- So, it's a different audience,
and that can be good and bad.
So, if you're making games that work really well
for the Steam audience, you might find that on the web,
it doesn't work so well, but equally,
games that don't find an audience on Steam
can work fantastically on the web.
So, it's just, it's a question of
doing your research into the platform
and seeing what works and what doesn't.
RPGs, the example you gave, RPGs can work well.
On web, you want games that keep players coming back
and are simple to understand, those two things
kind of, in concert, make a good web game.
- How is it remote by Joseph?
- No.
- Is it similar to the web, or like,
are we talking more like, the Steam Nintendo process?
- Well, I think there's, it's in a spot in between, right,
because you have an approval process,
and so that means you do need to be at some level,
but it's a much lower bar than it is for the console,
and you can iterate with updates,
closer to what you could on Steam or the web.
But, yeah, I mean, I think the mobile has similar challenges
to the web when compared to like Steam, for instance,
because you do have to think about
what your business model is gonna be like.
Steam kind of just carries forward the pay up front model,
and web tends to be a little more like ad supported.
And, you know, it seems like with iOS,
you have like tons of people,
but they're only there to download free stuff,
and so you have to think about,
well, is it gonna be an ad supported game,
or am I gonna have a free trial,
or how do I get somebody there and keep them there,
and then actually turn around and make money on it?
Is there any case for like ad supported games
on like console or Switch?
Do you know that if this is a thing?
- Oh, I don't think so.
I don't think there's, currently I don't think
there is any space for ads on consoles.
I think most players would not look agreeable on that.
- I mean, it's kind of like more premium driven,
definitely, while the web and mobile
is definitely more on the free to play market.
But like, I know from like my experience
that web and mobile is like where you can get tons of players,
like way more than you would get,
maybe in a Steam next festival or something like this,
but like, well, it's really hard to get like players
to look at your game to validate ideas.
How is it, for example,
with like web, how fast can you get out,
and like, how do you do your idea validation in general?
Like, how do you do it on Switch?
Where it's probably the most difficult to do it,
because in a kind of playset sessions, I would assume,
to web where you can just like upload something
and see what happens.
- Yeah, so on crazy games in particular,
we do have an approval process as well.
So it's not quite, it's not quite open to everybody.
You do have to meet a certain level of quality,
but we do have basic launch,
which is like a soft launch.
So that your game is uploaded there.
We track it against some metrics.
It's shown to a smaller audience,
but you still get feedback.
You get kind of analytics and stuff.
So we track playtime, retention and conversion.
And so you can get a few hundred players,
a few thousand players really quickly through that.
So it's quite, it's very good for idea validation, yeah?
- Sorry.
- How would you do that? I mean, he talks about a few thousand
players, like how do you do it with Switch games?
- The model is completely on the opposite.
I mean, you don't have, you always have to get,
it's a, you have to sell a game directly from a price,
not doing ads, not doing.
You could try to go to a free game with equip payments,
but that's not something that,
and indeed, we'll be able to do one in a way
that it could be an actual business.
But I have no clue, no idea about these other models.
I'm really a video game creator,
and I don't think that games should be designed
around monetization.
I should be, the game should be designed
for what you are really, really, really want to do.
And well, luckily, on Switch,
this is the only model available for indie developers.
You have to put a price to get to the game.
You can't have it for free,
because Nintendo doesn't want you to give away games
because they have to sell others if you give this game for free,
and they won't buy this another one.
And well, I think, I don't know about the rest of the things.
I got a bit lost about this mention
of the process of certification.
I can get into specifics, but on Nintendo,
it has to have a quite high quality assurance.
Most of the times, you can get away with some things,
but usually, they require you to give good build,
good game, and these things.
- You could see me dying.
I was dying to ask you about certification,
because it's like, me, literally,
that's kind of the heart of the question, right?
You know, with mobile, you can just go straight up
and in Steam, you have the ability to pre-purchase
or to get on the wish list,
and so there is a place where you can get users
without having a QA team or a full QA cycle.
iOS has the same thing with test flight,
and they also have pre-orders now as well.
So, if you're used to getting wish list on Steam,
that is a way to pre-promote,
but I don't know.
So that was kind of what I was wanting to ask you.
It was like, on the console side,
I don't know how you can get to the volume
of people you might need to be able to test
and validate your gameplay ideas
or how your interactions are gonna be,
or, you know, if it's multiplayer,
especially if I can have enough people there on day one
that you actually deliver the experience you wanna deliver.
- I can tell about multiplayer games,
because I can't do that.
It's at a whole another level.
How we reach people, basically spamming.
That's the way we publishers,
we as small publishers can try to reach people,
trying to request requests for reviews,
for the content creators, to blogs, to 21,
that will want to help any kind of help.
I mean, the most leader one is really welcomed.
- Well, my answer is that I don't have an answer.
There's no correct, there's no good way to reach people,
to find, to reach the audience.
The best way is to be a publisher
with a lot of resources and a lot of money
to invest 10 times, if you, if you've gained
cost $10 million, spend $100 in marketing,
and it will hopefully sell.
But, I don't know, in my talk yesterday,
I said, and I will repeat it.
The best marketing strategies are,
one, the first is the game developer.
Well, having a good game, of course.
If you don't have a good game,
it will be impossible to market it.
The second most important is having a game developer,
having the game developers talk about it,
creating community, spreading the work by themselves,
being them, the ones requesting those reviews
to the content creators instead of our publishers.
And the third one is to build a 10 machine
and going back to 2020.
It was a good year for, about a year, of course,
for COVID, but the best year for selling games
because there was a huge demand back then.
- So just to jump in on this topic,
that's something that is a really big benefit of the web,
because, so our basic launch is the kind of soft launch
shown to a limited audience.
That's still, you know, a couple of hundred,
a couple of thousand players.
A full launch is 10 times that.
Most games that I've seen have 20 to 50,000 players
in the first week just by being on the new games kind of sell.
So that's one of the big benefits of web,
is you get a lot of players very quickly.
- Are these storefronts, like, in your opinion,
comparable to each other, like, not comparable?
Like, does it make sense to launch on, like,
several of platforms at the same time?
And your eyes, can you do that even
with like a browser game, for example?
To, like, I know you did porting.
What about your games?
Are they just on Switch?
Or do you have a Steam version as well?
And what would you consider as, like, other platforms,
like, where you can release your game?
The most of my games were released on Steam first.
And usually, if in Steam, work well.
The game sold a few thousand copies.
It will perform five times better on Switch
than on Steam.
That's my non-right ratio.
- Interesting.
- No, but it's not always the same.
I mean, I've seen games that were released on Steam
and didn't sell a copy or sold a few copies the first day.
And on Switch sold one thousand.
The reason, well, this, well, I thought I was thinking
the opposite case, but it's not the opposite.
It's more like, some games really work very well
on Steam, and some games work really well on Internet Switch.
And I have seen some of them that really failed
on Steam, but they were good enough.
They were really good, but not understood
by the community of Steam,
or not being able to reach the audience on Steam.
- I don't know if I have answered your question.
- Yeah, it was just Paul was, like, definitely doing,
having a different experience on that
based on your face expressions.
- Yeah, I mean, we didn't release on Switch,
but we were, when we released our game on Steam
and people played it and it blew up,
the first, one of the first questions always
was always when will it arrive at Switch,
because obviously it was tailored to the Steam deck,
and the Switch would be the same form fact
that would work pretty well.
But we, I don't, we didn't see any way
how to reach like the audience of Switch players
or anything, we had no experience there,
and the only reason why Switch players
would play the game on the Switch
is because they know it from Steam.
That would be our point of view,
and we were kind of stumped how to approach this.
Obviously, that problem solved itself
and we kind of put our porting from Switch on ice
because of technical issues,
but other than that, on the other platforms,
they saw our game performing well on Steam
and then said, okay, this is a good fit,
we want you on our platform,
and this is like, they do some sort of promotion there,
also you get like a certain spot in their front end,
because they trust that when the game performed so well
with on PC that console players will also enjoy this.
So this is like a little boon that you usually get,
but it doesn't guarantee your success on consoles, I think.
As I said, consoles is like, for us always a second thought
or has been a second thought in previous games
because we primarily develop for PC
and then move on.
- I think to take a different tack to what you're asking,
one thing you have to think about is what your interaction
model is, aside from the business model,
there's like if you have like an RTS game
and it's keyboard centric, right?
Like that's probably not gonna translate well to console
or to the phone, but the flip side of that is if you have
like Bluetooth controller support,
then getting to the consoles and the desktop, I mean,
I think like web can support Bluetooth controllers,
so you could probably hit all of them.
If it's a very controller centric experience,
yeah, and then if it's a touch centric experience,
then probably console is not great.
It's gonna be mobile and web can do touch, but yeah.
- But what do you say that if I develop for mobile,
because like it's not too typical,
I assume to like integrate controller support
into mobile products if you can make mobile-first games?
- I mean, if you're doing mobile first
and that's what you're focused on,
yeah, you might choose a different interaction model,
so it might be touch first.
So yeah, Bluetooth controller could be an afterthought.
If you have, you know, there are definitely a few approaches
to get on-screen controls and we have a nice trick
I'll show when I'm gonna show this to go later,
but iOS has built in on-screen Bluetooth controller emulation
like from the operating system.
So if you're using that, then if you have
a Bluetooth controller paired,
then there's no on-screen controls, it just works.
And then if you don't have it paired,
then it puts the on-screen controllers up.
So, you know, like it's, you know, a fair number of games
probably have Bluetooth controller support
and you're maybe just not even aware of it.
And like I was saying, the web can do the same thing as well.
Like if you have set up input maps in Godot
for controllers, then if somebody's playing on the web,
on their PC and they have a controller paired,
it's gonna work.
- How about the myth built once, ship it everywhere?
Is that a myth or is it like something you can actually do?
- I mean, yeah, I mean, it's something you can do.
Different platforms have different challenges.
So on the web, the big challenge is build size.
So you need to get your build size is quite small.
There are extra steps to do for that.
On mobile, it's fairly similar, I'd imagine.
On consoles, runtime performance can be a big issue,
I think, as you were saying.
So like there are different challenges everywhere.
So yes, technically, you can build
just straight away for each platform.
But in reality, there's probably gonna be
some platform specific challenges that you have to face.
- I mean, Pablo, it seems like your strategy is like steam
and then console basically afterwards.
And it's probably a similar thing to agree on.
- Well, it's best to release first fire game on steam
and then in the industry, it's because you will be able to see
if the game, it's really easy to receive feedback
from steam users and then fix those things in the game
and release an improved version on the industry.
I try to, sometimes I have released a game
in both platforms at the same time.
And the thing is that it reduces the wave,
the release wave, at least for a small polyester like me,
which, as I said, my audience reads is really, really small.
I would always do that.
Going for one platform and then for another.
About the things they talk on internet switch,
you can have actually games that can be played with fingers.
It's not an issue to do that.
But it's usually preferable to have a specific control
that sometimes it's a bit neighbor
because you have a lot of hope to see in every button.
But it can be done.
And I have seen many games that can do that,
but it shouldn't be done for competitive games
or action games.
Well, I would never do a mobile game
that uses the ARBA at that spot.
That's fun.
How do you say virtual game path?
Basically, yes, I can stand at the games with that.
Oh, I just wanted to give an answer to that,
which is just that I think that what I've been telling people
is that mobile is a very big market
and you should be thinking about it early on.
So my message to people is don't eliminate
the thought of going there from your plans.
You can make decisions early in the process
that will make it easier or you might find
that it's easier to get to mobile than you think it is.
You know, I was looking at the Godot surveys
of where people plan to go and mobiles, you know,
I think surprisingly low,
given the amount of revenue that's in the space.
So, you know, like, keep your options open at a minimum
and it's not as hard to get there as you might think it is.
- Well, looking at the audience,
like in general, the Godot space,
there's a lot of smaller ND studios.
It's like, they're not so many more.
I don't know of any triple A really company
that you use, you know, besides DICE
with the battlefield extension, maybe, for the map making.
But where would an ND studio, where would you lead them?
Where would you say that's the best platform
and why isn't like that?
Like, why should they release on a specific platform
and focus on that?
Or should they go more broad?
And yeah, is it your platform?
Is it like, what do you think, like, which platform and why?
- So I really like web because smaller games work better.
So you don't really have to have 50 hours of content
that you've spent five years making.
You can do a really short scope game in three months.
You can focus on making a fun game
because actually the things that work best on web
are generally the games that are the most fun.
So you don't really have to kind of invest as much into it.
So for a smaller game, for a smaller studio, sorry,
you can iterate a lot.
So they say Rovio made 50 games before Flappy Bird.
That model for an indie is very, very good.
You learn a lot, you kind of get better at releasing things.
You call it increase of time, you get feedback from players.
So I think the kind of shorter games, shorter dev cycles,
I think that's really, really powerful for indies.
- Yeah, I would say for, I mean, for us,
PC is like the best way to release an indie game first
and try it out because it's your development platform
but default usually, you develop on a PC,
you test on, you develop on your target platform basically.
So I think that's a good start
and it makes perfect sense to start there.
I, up until today, I didn't consider like web
but it's actually a good point.
Dom and I, we had a short chat before this event
and I realized maybe we should consider like,
if we want to make a little demo or test
or see if a game works with players,
maybe we should look into a web.
But as you said, this is also a different audience.
So you probably don't hit the same text
that you would hit when you would release a steam demo
or something like that or do a playtest with PC players.
Yeah, but for us, I think PC is the way to go
because it's easier and PC is a more developer friendly thing.
Consoles is, yeah, I would say, as you said,
they need to be polished, they need to be ready games,
they need to pass certification.
And so this is like for me, first polish them on PC
when it works there, then move on to,
and then look out for other.
- Think about these things when you basically created
your steam game also determined that you want to port it
to like the console later and like that you talk about
controls, play, import, gamepad and these things.
So was it like an afterthought for you?
And we like, okay, now we try to move it to the consoles.
- When we started the game, we had little time
because we were running out of money.
So we had to get go fast.
And we realized, okay, this game is pretty simple.
So controller support makes sense
because there are a lot of PC players who play on control.
So this kind of was a given.
And also, since we have like a small screen,
like a small resolution and everything is about,
well, visibly very well, it would be a good fit
for the Steam deck.
And concurrently, that would also lead us to think,
"Hey, maybe if this blows up next, our console."
So this is like, this was the chain of thinking for us.
We also released on mobile, by the way.
But it wasn't us who released it.
We just asked a contractor or a publishing studio
that they ported the game for us.
And we just said, okay, here, have our code
and please don't bother with us anymore
because we have no idea about mobile for the mobile space.
The last time when I interacted with the mobile space,
it was very difficult and cumbersome
because you need to do constant updates
and then you have to maintain the game,
you have to like this fragmentation of,
I don't know if this is still a thing.
But it's very, it's high maintenance for us.
And you need to understand the ecosystem as well.
There are different rules
and we didn't want to get bothered with that.
So we just asked the publishing, a mobile publisher,
if they could make a deal with us, they get 50%,
we get 50% and they could do with it what they want.
And we don't, we look away like this.
And so this is like, that was the mobile venture for us.
But yeah, so it's very, yeah.
The quintessence is that there are so different audiences
that it's difficult to compare those.
So I think my answer to that would be that
we're trying to lower the bar, the barrier entry
because it is too easy.
Like, yes, you're already on the desktop,
you're familiar with it.
But the desktop market is North America and Europe.
A lot of the rest of the world does not actually have
a desktop gaming market, but they have a mobile gaming market.
And I thought of that when you were mentioning
your version of on-screen controls.
I mean, yeah, I feel the same, but like a lot of people,
like that is their gaming device is a mobile phone
and a Bluetooth controller for like a big chunk of the world.
And consoles are great and web is good too.
But you know, it's like, you know, the bar,
I mean, the barrier to entry for mobile
is a lot lower than people think.
I think a lot of people kind of, you know,
when you're coming from the desktop and you're thinking,
well, I can just put shit straight to, you know,
to the web or even to steam.
Like you can kind of get your head around
what the steps are to do that.
But as soon as you start thinking mobile
and dealing with their approval process,
you might make it bigger in your head than it,
than it actually is.
And then I guess, you know, to kind of close that thought out,
like it's not just that there's a big chunk of the world
that's not desktop first.
It's like if you look at the breakdown of revenue,
mobile is where, is where the money is actually
the biggest chunk of things being made, so.
- That's why we said, okay, let's do this.
It's worth doing, but we don't have,
indeed, house expertise to do this ourselves.
- But we wanna make it easy enough for you.
- Oh, that's, that's great.
- Next time you won't have to give up that half.
- Yeah, okay.
- There's actually some questions like you did,
like you asked basically to outsource the mobile version
that you also changed the monetization model
because we were discussing that before.
And is that like, are you happy with the result?
I'm sure you played it and looked at it
and like what is your kind of impression from it?
- I was dreading the idea of trying it out actually.
(laughs)
They, the monetization is like in the mobile market,
monetization needs to be thought into the game design.
And we didn't do this.
We kind of, yeah, this is contrary to all values.
So we just let the publisher do that.
They just do, as we said,
you have, you have free reign.
I know that our, our outlet tried the game and said,
oh my God, they butchered the graphics and so forth.
But that was necessary to rank it run on the platform,
of course.
And also the UI looks completely different.
I think also that the balancing is different.
So, so because there's a free and a premium version,
like this, this dichotomy is there.
And we're like, okay, it's just how mobile is, I guess,
in the ecosystem.
So this is how you make money with mobile games.
And we just let them do this.
And, and I kind of, for me, it was like,
yeah, this is a pure financial decision for us.
It's not, it's, yeah, my, my game design
is probably a completely different one
than the one on the, on the mobile platforms.
So this is like a little bit, yeah.
It's like a project, a project child that you left away.
- Right now there's like the possibility
with, for example, Xcodeo from Joseph works on that,
where you can basically like load up your builds
and on an iPad already and try it out.
That you do something like this to kind of like
see how it would work and like,
talk about it where you like Anna.
- No, I think we had, we had the other construction sites.
We had to tend to.
So, so, yeah, we didn't, we didn't consider it, I think.
But this is a new information for me, actually,
this is possible.
- This Joseph, if you can elaborate about that one.
- Oh, well, so yeah.
So this ago is our port of Gado to the,
to the, to the iPad and the iPhone.
So you can actually just copy your project files
over to your iPad or your iPhone,
load the project up and run it.
I mean, you can do the editing there as well.
But like from the standpoint of starting with the desktop,
it's pretty straightforward.
And kind of pre-announcing like what I'm announcing
at my talk, but what the order doesn't matter,
but we do have a Gado extension now in the asset store
so that you can just have, as a go,
push straight to the device.
So you don't even have to move the project files over
and you can actually remote debug from Gado
to iPhone or iPad using Gado.
- Oh, that's awesome.
- So you should, you know, and then you can take control
of it and you don't, it doesn't have to be the prodigal son.
I think like the count, like,
I think a lot of people think that and that's like,
I mean, that's a good business for mobile porting houses
and like they can probably make decisions
that maximize the revenue.
But like if you want to have the experience be
as close to the original as possible
and you want to own that experience,
then you might prefer to do the port yourself
and choose a model that is maybe closer
to your original vision.
So yes, you could maybe do in that purchases
to make a lot of money, but not feel great about it,
or maybe you just do a time trial or a few levels for free
and then say, okay, well, you gotta pay from this point.
Like that's, you might be a lot more comfortable with that
and you might not have to change the way the game works
as much to move to a model like that.
- Okay, interesting.
I'm sorry that I took it like before you.
- Oh, no, no.
- I didn't know about it.
- It's had to take a moment to think about like what,
but you know, it's public, it's out, it's out.
All right, you can pretend like you're surprised
if you come to me.
- Just a real quick, like how long would you say
it takes an indie team to make a viable product
on like your certain platform, like Steam, web, mobile,
like let's say a team of five, which is probably
like the typical good old kind of team size,
like four or five people.
How much work is it to release a viable product
that gets your return of investment,
like just an estimate?
What ballpark are we talking about?
- So I can take a host of tournament as an example.
We started the game with two people actually
from the team the first month,
then we had the first playable game.
And then we tested it in the office.
And one co-worker in the studio
who wasn't involved in the game, played it.
And this one month prototype,
like he stuck to the screen for three hours.
And we're like, okay, I think we got something there.
So let's add graphics, let's flash it out.
Then we were three people for about another five months.
And then we had a playable demo already
with two levels with three characters.
And you could, there were all everything,
the baseline was in place.
And then we just published a free demo on Steam
and looked what happened
without any big marketing stuff or anything.
What we did do is like we did send out keys to streamers
because back then survival likes were like the hype
and streamers were playing it a lot.
And so we were like right in the middle of this whole wave.
Today you would probably not get such a big response
than we did.
So the wave is over so you would have to think of something else.
But back then it worked.
And we realized, okay, the demo is actually catching up.
We got like a couple of hundred reviews
within the first week.
And we said, okay, cool, let's roll with it.
Another three months, after three months, we released it.
And then still three people only.
We released it in early access
and it's in early access, we got our money back
within a couple of weeks of investment.
The whole, until that point I think the budget was about,
I don't know, 50K, something like that.
And we got 70K back shortly after the release.
And then the streamers kicked in and then blew up.
So there was a lot of luck involved.
This is like, you remember survivorship bias.
There are like things that always factors.
It was a perfect storm.
The stars aligned and everything worked out.
Today wouldn't work that way, of course.
Also, for example, one thing that we were lucky about
is that the Apple 4 was announced.
And our goal was to release two weeks
before the Apple 4, right?
We even have had a talk.
We were in talk with a potential publisher.
And they said, "No, don't do this."
And your price is too low and you should sign with us.
We bankroll you and you move the release six months later
and you will make much more money with that.
And we declined because our mind was set on this planet
and we had no regrets, right?
We worked out.
Because the reasoning was that players who looked forward
to the Apple 4 would itch for something until the release.
And when we came along with the Apple-like game,
that this also survival-like and very short-term,
it would catch players and that worked out as well.
People mentioned the Apple 4 in our reviews
like every 10th review, "Oh, better than the Apple 4"
or something like that, something ridiculous stuff.
How many months then, from the beginning to the release?
- The full release. - The full release.
It was about a year,
year and a half, more or less, year and a half, yeah.
But with the first validation, basically, after a month,
internally and then, excellently, pretty quickly.
Always validate your games, always.
On web, a team of five can probably make a game in a month.
That brings back the revenue.
Obviously, there are challenges with that.
But when you've taken a month to make a game,
the risk's very low.
And you can then do another game the next month.
And you start earning money over time.
And all of them add together.
And you can, from the studio, quite happily.
So, if you've got a team of a few people working full-time,
then a month is a perfectly good estimation
for making a game that works on the web.
- That's pretty interesting for in-between projects,
kind of like making a web game for once in a while.
How's it with mobile?
- I don't think I can answer this.
I mean, it's how much water is in a bucket?
Like, how much, what do you want to be?
I think that it is, I think, plenty of people do ship
a mobile game within a month.
Probably they're successful money-making ones.
But when Miguel and I decided that we were going to use a go,
which is an app, so it's a little bit more than a game.
Like, he's like, "I think we can probably get something out
in three or four months."
And that took about a year and a half.
So, it's like, you know, scope creep happens.
So, yeah, I wouldn't touch estimating what it takes a team
to make a game.
Yeah.
So, you said your games on Switch, they have to be, like, good games,
or how do you call them?
Like, they have a certain level of quality.
Like, how long to achieve that?
- Okay, when I say level of quality,
I don't mean a huge game, a big game.
I mean, something that it's not broken, basically.
I mean, small indie games, solo developers can actually
make a full game for Switch, no need to make something extra.
Our mobile game can be really released on indie Switch
with just a few changes, and basically,
comparing with the Wii Nintendo Skylines.
But, well, to happen, I return on an ROI on a video game made for Nintendo Switch.
Think about Suica, this game could be done into weeks,
and it's a million copies, three euro in Japan,
and then in the rest of the world.
And you could make 1000 Suicas and not make one cent.
So, I don't have an answer for how much should you,
I do need to invest on how much time do you need to make a successful game,
but because the answer is no.
You can do 10 huge games and not get the ROI.
And, well, I wish I had a good answer for that.
- Before we open the questions to the audience,
I would be interesting to see, like,
who's actually working on a game right now for Steam or PC in general?
Like, could they raise your hands?
There's a lot of hands going up, like, if the camera doesn't see it.
Who's doing that for web?
Oh, there's actually some hands going up.
What about mobile?
And, like, same as web about, I would assume, and console.
Any console games working on?
Okay, there is, like, a very shy hand coming into the air.
I would now open the panel basically for questions from the audience.
If anyone wants to know something and ask our panelists something,
please raise your hands.
And, Max, comes to you in a second.
- Thank you very much for your insights.
Very interesting.
Now that we have seen the show of hands and are very interested in console,
there was only one hand.
What do you think is the reason that many of us
good old developers don't go console first or don't go to console at all?
- I think there's a very high barrier of entry to console.
So it can feel like there's just so much you need to do.
I need to get into it with Nintendo, Microsoft, Sony.
I think the barrier to entry is quite high there.
I think that can probably explain a lot of it.
- The follow-up on that.
Do you think this is a perception issue, or is it actually that way?
- I think it's a little bit of both.
I have released a game on Xbox.
It is easier than you think, but it's not easy.
- Yeah, I agree on that.
We sim-shipped on multiple consoles, and it was a rough ride for us.
Because the Godot ecosystem for consoles still has some rough edges,
but in the end it turned out well.
But it is not like you press a button and then you push it to the console.
That's not how it's working.
Because the hardware is obviously different.
For example, we have threading in our game,
and then the threading on the console works differently,
and it crashes because the stack size is wrong,
and then stuff like that you have to take care of that.
So there are small details that still create the technical barrier,
but there's also a lot of bureaucracy involved,
because there is a higher bar for quality.
Your game should pass certain tests.
Sometimes you also need to adapt certain things.
For example, there is one requirement,
one specific one for screen sizes or something like that.
There is a safe area, and your readable,
interactable elements shouldn't be inside the safe area of the screen.
So what we had to do is increase our fixed resolution
so our UIs fit into that area, just for consoles.
So this is one example of many that you look into.
So this is not like you just push a button and it's there.
And I guess consoles also live from the big polished AAA games
that they shine on there, and the players are used to finished,
polished, perfect products, basically.
And in these, they have like most in these, at least.
In this I know, they have like this mentality of cam.
I make a game, I make it quick, I release it,
and then I get feedback from the players.
Like they live from the community.
So it's a little bit different.
All right, we have time for one more question.
Well, should I answer that too?
Because we're in the one doing suits.
I mean, the dev kits are not available for everyone.
So you can publish on PC by just buying 99 Yukon values
on a website, just having FTP.
You can do it on iPad, buying an iPad, a retail iPad.
But for Nintendo, for publishing on consoles,
and only consoles, you have, even if we have in the programs,
you still have to do a whole process of being accepted
or going with a publisher or porting, well, a publisher.
We'll probably need a publisher that will take a huge card
of because they will have to work a lot on doing this port,
on doing this marketing, doing the services.
That's why it's easier to go with another platforms.
But that maybe the reason it's sometimes easier to sell on consoles
than other platforms, it's a bit less crowded.
It's a little crowded, but not that much currently.
All right, thank you for the interesting panel.
We don't have sadly not any more time for another question.
So in about seven minutes, we're going to have the next talk
from Zimona Mendel about art direction and art direction crash course.
So see you there soon.
Get some drinks and thank you very much for the panelists Paul,
Dom, Joseph, and Pablo.
