API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93372
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/godotfest2025-godot-foundation-q-a
Title: Godot Foundation Q&A

[MUSIC PLAYING]
Our first speaker today, Amy, is executive director
at the Godot Foundation.
And he is leading the organization's mission
to advance the Godot engine and to support developers
all over the globe.
He has been part of the development,
and he's working with Godot since a very long time.
Even he can't remember.
And therefore, he has also very extensive knowledge
about the development, about the future roadmap, future events,
and initiatives of the Godot Foundation.
He's also the host of the weekly livestream, Godot tomorrow,
and where you can, that's Q and A livestream,
where you can ask a lot of questions,
any questions about Godova, about Godova Foundation,
and today he will do a live session here on the stage for us.
And...
(audience applauding)
And what better way to start Godova's 2025,
with a Godova Foundation Q and A, with Emi.
(audience applauding)
(audience applauding)
- Okay, can you hear me all right?
Okay, so I'm gonna do like a little introduction
about some of the topics,
some of the things that we are working on.
So to remind you, if you have any questions,
you know, you can ask about any of those.
I will preface with, I will not go
into any super technical answer.
Usually those are better on GitHub,
but feel free to ask anything you want.
Okay, so, it's a bit hard to see right now,
but I guess everybody knows by now,
but I have to say, like the Godova Foundation
is a nonprofit organization,
and like the intro said,
we are basically the team that's behind the engine
and receives the donations
and hires people to work on making it possible.
So, you know, the main thing that we do
is the Godova Engine that everybody uses,
but there's other things that we need to do
to further our mission.
One thing is all the infrastructure
to receive those donations
and to actually, you know,
distribute it in the way that the community wants us to.
I just wanted to mention this is the fun side.
This is where you can go and donate.
We recently made this change.
So in the first square over there,
like it's the one-time donations.
Next to it, you have the euros per month.
If you remember from before,
we only used to show how many the donations per month we have.
The issue is that once we had a big donation for a year,
then we split that donation into 12 months
and we showed all that.
What happened at the end of the year,
the donation ended and everybody was panicking,
oh my God, God lost a lot of funding.
What's happening on?
So I think this is a better way of displaying it.
And we've seen like a huge increase in previous year
when we enabled one-time donations.
We enabled it in December and we had like 100K
from all the sponsorships and individual donations.
And this year, it's gonna be way bigger than that.
So yeah, if you have any questions about donations,
please let me know.
Then there's also, I should have picked the light theme here.
But then there's the asset store,
which is something that we've been working for a while.
And many of you who are not so much
into the making games of it,
but also the other side, like making assets,
making music and all that.
I know that it was a bit confusing
where to find these sort of assets or where to publish them.
It's going very well.
We have like a lot of new users.
Of course, it's still in beta,
so a lot of things are changing.
You can visit the website here.
We have links to the change log and the roadmap.
Which if you want to know what's coming,
it's always you to have there.
And we are probably gonna be replacing the asset library,
which is the one that you have on the engine very soon.
We wanted to do it kind of painless.
So you don't have to think about if the asset
that you want to use, it's already on the asset store node.
So we're gonna be contacting many of you.
If you have an asset published on the asset library,
you should try this out and give us feedback.
But there was like a very small game called Battlefield 6,
who decided to send a lot of users to us.
And they are all using the asset library.
So we have to make sure that that transition is smooth.
Then other things that we do was recently,
like at the beginning of last week,
I think it was, no, on Friday.
We released the show reel,
and how the show reel is made is historically,
we got like all the submissions,
and then all the maintainers and the people
who are contributing to it got to vote
in terms of like which ones they like.
And from those, from the top ones,
we made the yearly video.
This time, we made this new platform,
which basically lets you vote.
And also, if you are donating to the record of foundation,
you can participate and you can also donate,
which has to be very cool because, you know,
people wanted to know which were the submissions,
and we wanted to let people in.
And I think the barrier of entry of being someone
who donates also helps a lot with the spam.
You know, we cannot open it to everybody
and get the crazy things from the internet.
And the priority list,
how many of you know about the priority list
that we have on our website?
Okay, not so many.
Yeah, that's why we need to do a bad job here.
So with the priority list, we want to do the same.
Basically, there's a lot of things
that different teams that are working on the road decide
that, you know, this is something that this area needs.
So they create these different items
in which you can see more or less what will happen.
This doesn't mean that it will come in the next version,
but it means that eventually we want to get to it.
And it's a bit hard for now to know what the people
who are donating want us to work faster on,
and maybe some things that we have on the priority list
have been there for a long time.
So what we want to do is kind of like a mix match
of the voting on the showreels and the priorities.
So you will be able to vote,
like which ones you think are the best priorities,
you know, for us to work on.
And hopefully we want to, you know,
incorporate more feedback from everybody
to make it, you know, better.
And yeah, know who we have to fire, to fire, to hire, thanks.
Yeah, okay.
Other things that we started doing is the website.
We added some analytics to it.
It's been a long time.
It's very controversial in many places to do this,
but we finally did it.
It's also hosted by us.
We want to expose it as much as possible
so everyone can check the status of it.
And once we did that,
we found that China was the second,
like most visited country.
We had all these data is from July until now.
We had this blind spot because everything
that we've been checking up until now
was coming from sources like YouTube or, you know,
all the places where you cannot disable it.
And in those platforms, you know,
they are banned in China.
So we couldn't see anything.
So, you know, this led us also to maybe explore
different users that we have a lot,
but we are not maybe paying a lot of attention to.
We also see Brazil third and Germany fourth,
who has been always in the top three, like for a long time,
until now China came.
So, you know, you have to keep up here in Germany.
But that also helped us inform some decisions, for instance,
like localizing the website to different languages.
It's already in German, in Portuguese, Spanish, Chinese.
There's also Japanese one, Korean, I think.
And it was a little bit of an experiment,
so only the home bridge is mostly translated,
but we're gonna keep working on making this easier for everybody.
Yeah, some other stuff that we do,
and of course you should get one flashy.
This was, you know, one of the collaborations
people really want to merge from us,
but if you have done any sort of metrics,
you see that it's kind of difficult
to find it in a, like, sustainable way,
that you don't have to be spending a lot of time
and resources in getting all the stuff shipped to you,
and then you shipping to everybody,
and all that, this was a good compromise,
because, you know, they take care of everything,
and, you know, people can enjoy the flashy.
So, this, you can get it now after my talk.
And yeah, we do a lot more, and as it was said,
I do weekly stream on Wednesdays, where it's kind of like this,
but, you know, from the comfort of your house.
So, if I didn't get to answer your question today,
happy to answer it on Wednesday.
But next week, and that's, I want to ask all of you,
we have a Q&A with the rendering team.
So, Kajung will be there answering all your rendering questions.
I know there's a lot of rendering questions all the time.
So, if I want for that, it would be nice
to save it for next week on stream.
Otherwise, feel free to ask anyway.
So, we're ready to start.
Just, you know, raise your hands.
I don't know how we, they're gonna get the microphone to you,
but before we start a Q&A, I have to ask you,
we have video recordings.
So, I come with the microphone to you,
and please speak into the microphone.
So, any questions, any hands?
I see some hands over there.
Oh, yeah.
- Hey, hey, oh, that is, sorry, a little bit loud.
Hey, I was wondering, so,
all the time volunteers choose what they work on,
or the core team decides what's the most important,
but I'm wondering overall, for all the budget,
how do you decide what's the next step to scale,
and in which region you would like to go into?
- And sorry, the last part.
- And what region do you think is the most important
from time to time, and where would you spend
all the budget you're getting bit by bit?
How do you scale this?
- Yeah, yeah, so, one of the things we use to inform that
is the feedback that we get from users,
and that's something that we try to get
from different channels.
Like, we get a lot of GitHub issues and reports.
We also are in touch with some studios
that are using a lot internally,
so they can give us feedback.
But also, we do check, more or less,
like what people talk about,
and what complaints are very common,
and we see time and time again,
so that's what we try to address.
Unfortunately, we do have more things
that we would like to improve,
that things that we can actually improve,
so that's why always getting more donations
helps us get more people on the team.
But ideally, how this works is that the users want something.
The team that's working on that area of the engine,
let's say the, I don't know, the rendering team,
like I mentioned, they identified that,
and they added as a priority,
and when those do match,
we know we can assign someone to work on it.
For a long time, there has been some areas
who have been neglected,
but usually it's areas where the people
who are struggling with are not communicating with us,
and that's why I want to encourage everyone
to tell me what your issues are,
and I know that not everybody wants to go into GitHub,
write a very boring report, filling out all those fields
for something that maybe doesn't apply
to more technical topics,
so that's something that we need to improve as well.
But as I mentioned before,
with the roadmap voting, hopefully we will also get
a very signal in terms of what to prioritize.
I don't know if I answered the question, okay.
- Hello.
So looking at it from the outside,
or looking at Godot from the outside,
I would expect a large challenge
to be coordinating these large features
that really have to fit together.
So let's say the node system or the UI system,
how do you handle with so many different people
contributing to Godot?
How do you handle the stuff that really needs
to fit together and have an overarching design?
- Yeah, yeah, that's a good question.
It's one of the challenges,
especially because a lot of volunteers,
you cannot really rely on them,
like they do a lot of work, like tons, tons of work,
but sometimes they disappear,
and you don't know where they are anymore,
and somebody else needs to pick up where they left it.
So what we are trying to do is to have at least one person
from the foundation in each team.
So whenever that happens,
we know that somebody else can fill in that gap.
It is starting, I think, to change a little bit
how the engine was made at the beginning,
when it was smaller, when there was less people involved,
when there were less people making the living out of it.
Everything was, I think, simpler.
There were less features, there were less stuff.
Now that everything is started to grow
and get more and more complicated,
we're finding it harder to get volunteers
to contribute into those big areas.
So that's why we are focusing on this
and getting at least one person on each team
that can actually handle that area,
because you've all seen like a million GD script requests,
and everybody wants like a million features in GD script,
but GD script is already quite complicated
as it is right now, and keep adding to that.
It's gonna make it harder and harder to keep adding stuff.
So we need to take a step back and think,
okay, what's really needed?
What's actually like preventing you from shipping a game?
And that's what we focus on, because yeah,
it would be nice to get structs.
I know many of you want structs,
or like traits or namespaces, many things like that.
But then it's like, we already see that many people
are able to ship games with no problem using using GD script.
It's not that they are not coming, right?
Those features.
But maybe something else, like a bug
or something that's actually preventing people to get there,
it's more important.
So that's how we can balance this sort of situation.
Hope I answered the question.
Okay.
- Yeah, I saw you showed the priorities page,
and I had the feeling like between 3.0 and 4.0,
there was a big push on multiplayer.
But then now it's not on the priorities page.
I just wonder why.
- Yeah, yeah, well, multiplayer is complicated
because there's different things you can do in multiplayer
to make your game happen.
And for us, we need to pick one
that could benefit the majority of users.
So if we say this is how you should do multiplayer in Godot,
then all the other options are kind of being left behind
or neglected.
It could be better, but the reality is like
we don't have many active maintainers in the area.
And there's currently no one working on the foundation
in multiplayer specifically.
There are some solutions that people use
and have been integrating, and that's, you know,
part of the asset store would be to incentivize
other people to provide better multiplayer systems
or better terrain editors or better things like that
because we cannot get to all of them.
But the reality of it is that we just don't have anyone
at the moment working on it.
And yeah, there are some cool tutorials
and stuff like that, but I know that it's not as easy
as it could be.
But then again, when you give an option that's very easy,
it usually comes with compromises.
And depending on the game you're making,
that might not be the right idea.
And then you start a building, all that.
And then you find that that roadblock.
And then, yeah, it's quite tricky.
But it would be something to, you know,
if we don't have an area that has any priority list,
it would be nice to add it just so people can vote.
Like we want better multiplayer in general
and then try to explore what would be
the most way of doing it.
So, yeah.
- Hello, I hope my question is not too technical,
but I was thinking about encryption.
Like at the moment, it's very easy
to reverse engineer the games.
And yeah, it's not no obfuscation, oh my God.
And are you aware of this?
Are you doing something about this?
Because I mean, I have a BFFC,
but every time compiling the whole engine by myself
and also the templates with an encryption key
is quite annoying.
- Yeah, yeah, no, we've seen it many times.
It happens at least once a month in Reddit,
somebody's like, how would I protect my game
if there's no encryption?
The reality is like, yeah, we could do better in that area.
I'm not saying not, but we cannot do it perfectly.
And there will always be ways of decompiling your games.
And that's also happening to real, to game maker, to Unity.
So it depends on how much you want to invest in it.
I think that's something that for the mobile users
is more of a concern because of people
kind of like pulling it and polishing.
But at the end of the day,
it's really tricky to find a solution
that will actually be bulletproof.
And if we do find something that could improve it
and we say, you have no encryption,
then a lot of people are gonna say, okay, that's it.
I don't have to do anything else.
And everything is fine.
Nobody will be able to copy it.
And that's not true because it's a cat and mouse game
and an enormous race of who can decompile it faster.
So is this preventing you from shipping a game?
No, would this help your business
not to get cannibalized by the system?
Yes, but I haven't seen it as often.
Like it reaches the headlines and it's very nice
because you can put some of these headlines somewhere
and you get a lot of clicks, you get a lot of comments,
a lot of engagement of what if they copy my perfect game
and they make millions of it?
But I haven't seen it happening with the existing engines.
So that tells me that it's maybe a little bit more
of a concern of a hypothetical
and we try to fix the concerns that are far
like more addressable and more like concrete.
So I think some improvements can be done,
especially in obfuscating, G-descript, things like that.
There are some plugins that you can use.
Going back to the asset store,
I'm sure that they will be better once in the future.
So yeah, it's a bit tricky.
You cannot really, as long as you're giving them the code,
you cannot really prevent them to do whatever they want with it.
So yeah, kind of weird answer, but you know.
- Hello?
- Yeah.
So this is the first I've heard that there was a good O stream
and I looked through and I didn't see announcement in the blog
so that I would never have found it there.
Can you sort of say what the best way
to get questions into you?
'Cause I can't see it.
I can only see the YouTube channel.
And then do you have each program?
Do you have like a theme or a topic?
Because my particular interest is in audio
and voice over IP and I've had one year working on
trying to get the microphone fixed
and that's kind of like something
where you might be able to mobilize a bit more force
to get things happening.
- Yeah, well, like I started this more or less,
the last one I think was the 10th stream I did.
So only 10 weeks ago, a little bit more
because I skipped a couple because of conferences.
And I didn't want to make a big announcement about it
until the format was kind of like right.
Basically I started bouncing off of the idea
of Blender today, which Pablo does for them, you know,
like biweekly and it's great
because there's a lot of community there
going and asking things and it's also a good way for us
to get what are the most common questions
and then we know what kind of thing people are thinking about.
But I'm still touching the format
in terms of like, should I showcase more like own hands
of how the new features look like?
Should I just answer questions?
So once we know the format a little bit more,
we're going to be making a better announcement.
And regarding the themes, next week,
it will be the first one that we do a themed one
for the rendering team.
But if that works out, I think we can do others.
And yeah, for asking the questions,
you can go and ask on the chat
or there's a thread on our forum
where if you ask it there,
I will go through them at the moment of the stream.
But yeah, it really depends on what the people want to see
and I've been noticing that people want to see
like when we merged the new SSR,
the screen space reflection,
that got a lot of like interest
and people wanted to see how it looked like.
So I did a very little demo and everybody was happy.
So maybe we should do more of that.
But yeah, it's an evolving thing, so.
- Hi, our studio uses Z# very heavily.
We're interested to know what the sort of next steps
for C# are because I feel like the conversation around it
has dropped away quite a lot.
So interested in hearing the next steps
and also where to find that info.
- Yeah, so it's a good time to ask that
because we will probably something about it very soon.
For a long time, we've been working
on the GD extension side of things,
moving it to GD extension.
We want to time it with the 4.6 releases
to show like an experimental build that people can try
and they can play around with it.
There will be a couple of changes,
but they shouldn't be too hard.
Maybe if your project is already way too advanced,
you should stick to the current implementation.
We're gonna still support that one
until we know that everybody's happy with the new one,
kind of like what we did with Jolt.
So it's not gonna be the default,
but then eventually it will come with a single binary.
It will download, there will be no other version
that you need to download.
The problem with that, and I have to be super honest,
is like most of the got of maintainers
and most of the people that the foundation don't use C#.
So for us, it's a big mystery.
We too hired a person to work on this
and there are a couple of maintainers
that are very passionate about it,
but it's not going as fast as it should be, right?
Because again, like for us,
I think most of us are using GD script
and are focusing on that,
but I think it will be very interesting,
not only for the C# people,
but also for the people who are doing
other language implementations,
like the Rust got out or Python or JavaScript,
because once we do this integration,
any other language will be able to use the same system,
the same GD extension system, right?
To also include their other implementations of languages.
So hopefully with that,
it will get a little bit more of a boost in interest,
and it will improve also how it is working right now.
So yeah, expect for when we get maybe two beta
and maybe by the end of this year
to see like an experimental build
and Raoul will make a blog post
about what the changes are and what you can expect.
And yeah, if you are working with C#,
please get in touch with us,
because that's also not a thing, right?
Like we don't hear a lot about people working on C#.
We know for instance the people
that who are making a slight aspire,
they are using C#,
but when we ask them, they are like,
(audience laughs)
Okay, so I guess it's fine,
but then other users have different expectations
and they tell us,
"I don't know, like I cannot do anything with C#."
And I feel there's a lot of misconceptions
that you're gonna just do the same
that you did in Unity, but in Godot,
and that's not the case.
But if we still see, you know,
this feedback of people wanting to do certain things
in a certain way,
we need to adapt to that,
but we need to hear from you.
So, yeah.
- Hey, Emmy, thank you for being here.
I was wondering,
what is something that the community doesn't do
or doesn't do enough of
that the community could do,
though it would make your life easier?
Like what are things that the community can do?
- I think it's your sound a little bit biased coming from me,
but donating.
That couldn't help a lot.
(audience applauds)
Like, there's many things in terms of like, you know,
I've seen it as I'm doing all these dreams,
answering questions and all that.
I see that people are now understanding some points better
so they can answer other people as well.
There is, I seen something that happened during the last year,
which I felt like a lot of newcomers don't really know
that you can actually talk to us.
They are like, oh, they got other people, right?
And I'm working on my game,
and then there's they got other people.
It's kind of like, you can come and talk to us.
And I feel like the community is not explaining that well enough.
Usually in the open source communities,
like you complain about something,
it's like make a PR, shut up.
No, contribute it yourself.
But it's like, that's not usually like a good answer.
So yeah, getting better, like, we hear people like,
we are struggling with this at our studio.
Okay, can you let us know?
Like, you can send us.
It doesn't have to be through the usual methods.
They can send us an email or message on this code
on rocket anywhere, but explaining what your issues are.
And that's very valuable for us,
because even if it's, you know, two or three paragraphs,
that's good enough for us to understand
that we can aggregate all that feedback to actually react.
So yeah, I would like everyone to know
that we are not a huge organization
with thousands of people that is working on this,
and we are not hearing you.
It's more like a community.
And yeah, we've been very thankful
that some of the games are supporting, you know,
like here we have like,
blood fish games who's doing brotheto,
chasing carrots who's doing a new game,
but also like a host of torments.
We have the developer from Berkshire roulette
who are donating right to us, and that helps a lot.
But if you check the list of people who are donating to us
and the successful growth games, there isn't too many.
So I will leave it there.
- Yeah, what's the deciding factor
for a major release for Godot?
And if you have like a Godot 5 in the future,
would you support Godot 4 and Godot 3 like forever?
- Yeah, would be nice.
For the deciding factor is mostly timing.
We try to keep like a release window of four months,
maybe six months of development depends.
But there's so many things happening
that it's good to put like,
like the reason I like a checkpoint, like, okay,
from here on out, like we try to stabilize,
and then this is a release is 4.6, 4.7, whatever.
There are some things that people want us to do
that don't qualify for this,
because we want everybody to be on the latest version
all the time, and we try to do a very good job of,
if you have a project in 4.5 and you open it in 4.6,
you are gonna have no issues with it,
to incentivize people to be on the latest one.
So we don't have to keep releasing all point releases.
But some of them don't fit,
and they are the candidates for a potential, I got at five.
The problem with that is that,
it's really hard to say now it's got at five,
because then that means you will have this transition,
like we had that was very rocky from Godot 3 to Godot 4,
where many of the tutorials didn't work at all,
many of the systems were different,
some knows didn't exist anymore,
like there were many different things happening
on a big change.
I don't think if we ever do a lot of five,
it will be like that, I don't think anybody wants that.
But if there's a way that something needs
to break compatibility with the past,
that's when enough of those happen,
we will consider it.
What we want to experiment a little bit more
is trying to make some changes that are like the jolt one,
or like the parallax know that we did,
where we still leave the other one on legacy mode,
but then we replace it with the new one.
But we know that if your game depends on something,
we are not gonna be taking it away.
That's a great opportunity for Godot 5, right?
And Godot 5, we can take away a lot of things
that we know that people are not using,
they are making other things more complicated.
But I don't think that it's a priority right now to do that.
Godot 3, for instance, is still maintained,
but the work that we do at the foundation for it is minimal.
Minimal, it could be like a few hours
on doing the releases and maybe checking the posts
before it goes on the website, things like that.
But that's mostly done by the community,
specifically Don Jelly, who's being like unstoppable force
of getting new stuff from Godot 4, to Godot 3.
But it's not on our priorities at all,
like we're not hiring anyone to work on Godot 3.
And I don't think that that would be the case
in case like a Godot 5 happens,
we will still support Godot 4,
because if you started your project in Godot 4,
you will want to finish it in Godot 4.
And yeah, I think right now at the moment
where most games that come out, where most,
like if not all games are already Godot 4,
so we're very happy to leave Godot 3 more on the background.
But if you're starting right now,
you need to make sure that you will be able to carry
the entire development, and that could be,
I don't know, three years.
So it's not going away anytime soon.
- Hi, I got a question about leadership
and the Godot Foundation and the future of Godot.
Right now there's a lot of investments coming,
like the host explained, to make it more business appealing,
which is a well-lit course.
And my thoughts were about,
well, my question is about,
will you keep the engine like small,
as in size, because the engine is very small,
compared to the other good engines.
But also in kind of way, the fun,
it is right at the moment,
because right now it's very much fun to me.
And there I want to hear your thoughts about it.
Maybe we have already talked with the other members
about this direction of the Godot engine,
because I think there's a lot of different interests
in this topic.
Thank you.
- Yeah.
Yeah, so regarding the direction and stuff like that,
I think our goal is always to give it as tiny as possible.
That's why it's so important for us
to get the asset store right.
So we can outsource part of that complexity
because we can even publish extensions
that people might need there.
So it doesn't have to come pre-built for everyone.
So that's will always be a priority.
It's impossible to keep it always as small as it is
right now as it was,
because computers are getting more and more complicated
for some reason that nobody knows.
But you know, let's make Bullcan,
and then Bullcan will solve every problem,
and then Bullcan doesn't solve every problem.
So now, for instance, we're gonna have to default
for DirectX on Windows, things like that.
So we keep adding those things that are crucial
if you want to ship your game in Windows,
and you know, same with many other topics.
I'm regarding the funding from companies and stuff like that.
Most of us at the foundation or members
who are contributing for a long time
are not too into VR or XR,
but that's where we get a lot of funding to work on that.
And that's why those features exist.
So I think that's how the companies can interact with us,
like they might not be donating for us
to change the entire direction of the project,
but if there's something that they are interested in
that it's not good enough,
they can contribute money for us to work on it.
And we've seen it, you know,
with meta helping us at the beginning,
and other companies like Chronos,
which is an organization also that gave us,
like some time to work on it and improve,
implement OpenXR and all that.
I don't think that the community will have given us that.
As the foundation, we wouldn't have prioritized that
because of the tiny market of XR applications.
And same, you know,
Apple contributing the Apple Vision Pro,
like I don't think any of us at the foundation
even considered about it.
My second companies want to come and give that support.
And that also comes with some monetary incentive for us
to make sure that at least it works.
And, you know, it doesn't get abandoned,
which is the hard part.
We were gonna keep doing it.
But our priority is always the developers.
And that's also some things that we still have to announce.
But at the foundation board as well,
like we wanted to include more people
that represent the community.
And that's why we added people who have been more hands on,
making games and publishing games,
because we believe that that's really important.
Same with the Android or iOS export,
like mobile has been kind of neglected for a long time.
We thought that the businesses were going to provide
that support themselves, like, you know,
maybe the big companies were going to give their own SDKs
for you to use their platforms.
But that doesn't seem to be the case.
And we are not waiting for Godot anymore.
And we said, like, let's do it.
And, you know, let's fill that gap
for many of our users that want it.
So yeah, I don't think that the direction is changing too much
in that sense since the beginning.
But maybe we can do, like, a barrage of showing
which sponsor is sponsoring what.
And, you know, I've seen some companies doing it already
in PRs that say, like, this PR has been sponsored
by this company, so you can know where they're investing.
But yeah, generally speaking, like, if I answered that,
like, keeping it very small,
and I don't think that it will change a lot in the future.
>> Speaking of PRs, the GitHub has a large number of open PRs.
Does the foundation have any plans to work on throughput?
It seems like there are a small number of people triaging.
You have plans to add more people, more folks review.
What's the thoughts on that?
>> Yeah. Yeah, so the numbers of PRs is something
that at the beginning when you start contributing to it
or, like, on the organization keeps you awake at night.
Like, oh, my God, there's how many thousands?
But if you check, like, the amount of closed issues
and open, like, the ratio is not about, like,
if there's 5,000 open, there's 25,000 closed.
So the number usually is very controversial
because many projects have been out of closing issues
that nobody reacts to in some time.
So they say, okay, if nobody interacted
with this in 30 days, we close it.
But that doesn't mean that the issue is fixed.
And maybe none of us have run into it yet,
but then somebody stumbles upon it
and they want to contribute to it.
If you find that, you know, the issue is closed,
but then, like, it's not really fixed.
Like, it's really hard to orientate yourself
into the status of things.
So we don't see any upside on closing those issues.
Of course, we still need to triage them
and that having that happens with all the issues
that get open, all the PRs, they get their proper labels,
they get their proper, like, boards for, you know,
our contractors to work on or, like,
community members organized to fix specific ones.
So it's not like we are not looking at it
and pretending it doesn't exist.
But I still haven't seen any argument for closing them.
That makes sense other than the number is now lower,
which I don't think is a good metric.
So we haven't.
I don't know if that answers the quiz.
Do you, sorry.
Oh, yeah.
- The question was more about throughput.
The rate that they're getting--
- No, oh, okay.
Yeah, the problem with that as well,
like we have some services of how long
the usual time for closing an issue is
and it varies a lot, like, a lot of them get close hours,
days, some of them throw all that away
in terms of like, maybe in six months,
nobody said anything.
We don't have any internal KPI in terms of saying,
like, you know, this is the amount of time that we want to do.
But the triaging happens very, very fast
after they get open.
And we have people hired to do that.
After the triage, it really depends on the team.
If we have someone hired working on that,
or if it's a priority for the community for us to,
you know, find that.
So, yeah.
- Morning, morning, Amelia, everyone.
So as an indie studio that's working for Godot for a year,
but by the way, amazing community,
amazing job you're doing over there,
we're struggling with SDKs and big companies
that you were talking about,
'cause we are mobile and, well, another trend of mobile,
which is more lifestyle, health,
incentivize people to move more.
What are the general priorities for the mobile development
in Godot, like SDKs, integrations,
on all of that to ease up our lives a bit?
- Yeah, so we are at the moment collecting all that feedback
in terms of which are the most important ones,
and trying to get to those first.
Some of them already existed and the community contributed.
So if they were abandoned, we took over and then we fixed them.
Some of them were just not done,
and others are maybe hard to find.
But there isn't at least a final list of SDKs that we have
that we say, yes, these are the ones that you can expect,
but as soon as we have it, we're gonna start showing them.
On the asset store, we're gonna start on the beta one.
We're gonna start adding like a tag,
which will be like official,
which is basically something that we officially support,
and you will be able to visit,
they've got a foundation page with all those SDKs.
If there's some missing for us, as I said before,
let us know why it's important to you,
and we're gonna try to first, what I do,
is I try to ask them to do it if they can.
If not, I try to ask money for us doing it.
And if all that fails and the community really, really needs it,
then we consider developing in-house.
But yeah, there isn't any list of that, you know.
What you're expecting in terms of like getting the stores,
the Play Store or the Apple Store to run,
be able to do like the transactions that you need,
you know, to buy stuff inside of the game,
things like that, some analytics like for the usual platforms.
I have to say they are better than before,
there's more like SDKs than before,
but still many of them are missing, so yeah.
- Hello.
On the GitHub of something is in a milestone,
like for milestone 4.6, does that mean if it's a PR open,
it'll get reviewed before that by one of the core team members
for merging, or is it just sort of,
how does it work with open PRs that have been open
for a while that are on a milestone?
- If it's in a milestone, that means that it's probably
like there's an intention for us to address it,
but that's not a guarantee that it will be addressed.
So that's something that most of the contributors look at,
because they already know that it has passed the triage team,
it's kind of like something that we want soon.
If you see that something is in a milestone,
is that regression or is that a crash or something like that,
you will get addressed before a release.
Everything else, it really depends.
You see at the end of each of the releases
that many of the issues get moved to the next milestone
right before the release,
because at some point you need to say,
okay, that's it, that's a release.
This is a nice to have, but maybe, you know,
to risk it to merge at the end of the process.
So it's a good indication that there's interest
on that issue to be, or that PR to be merged,
but not a guarantee, so.
- Hi, I wanted to ask you that you like
that everybody's on the newest version,
but I feel like, is there, or is there any priority
to update the versioning itself?
So instead of downloading the newest version,
we had a website or directly into the IDE itself.
So I feel like the versioning updating is quite annoying.
- So you mean updating to the latest one from the IDE, right?
- Is there a priority about it?
- No, not because if you are too deep
into the development of it, you shouldn't, right?
Like maybe like you have to pick the moment
where you want to do it, and also you kind of have,
you already have like a system that tells you
if there is an update or not, but to make the entire launcher
to automatically download versions,
and to keep them in your system and all that,
it's not something that I feel is too difficult.
You know, you download, go out in a few seconds,
if you have a decent internet, and then you double click,
and that's it.
So making it easier than that feels like why, right?
Would be nice, and the project manager should get some updates
eventually, you know, showing maybe like a cool image,
maybe more online capabilities to check
if there's any news that you should know about,
or if there's any version, things like that.
But ideally, it should be self-contained.
So if you download our version, you know,
you can use it, you can put it in a USB and run it anywhere.
And if you start doing the launcher, then like,
are we going to ship the launcher to everybody?
And then like, there's too many implications for it,
for a system that works okay, and if you want a launcher,
there's like five or six that already exist,
that automatically download the latest version,
that you can tag.
So yeah, I don't think that it's a huge priority,
and we don't have any conversation open about it.
But yeah, I have many plans for what I would like to see on that,
but not too important.
Yeah, I feel it's too oriented to people who have many projects
at the moment, and it's like, you know, it shows like,
temporary, it's like, you shouldn't be working on 10 games
at the same time, right?
Like, we're not incentivizing the right thing here.
Hello.
So I really like that the go.engine is open source,
and I really love also to see other open source games,
so that the games are.
So if the source got available, I also made a few.
And my question is, if there is a plan from the go.do's
foundation to support also games made to the go.do.engine
that are open source, maybe with visibility.
I saw there was the awesome go.do list,
but maybe it's there a plan to do that more,
or even some day, even support them financially or something
like that.
Yeah, no, not at the moment.
Like, we do have a showcase page where we show some projects,
and it's a bit neglected at the moment.
Most of them are like commercial projects,
but I heard from, like, popular games
that they also wanted to open source them,
and they were asking me, like, what should we do about it?
So it would be nice to have them,
but there isn't any plan on making something specific
for open source games.
I would say, if you want to get more contributors,
you should maybe post it in the socials.
Like, Reddit gets a lot of attention
from other communities, or the Discord.
And if the game is successful enough,
we can always try to highlight it
in one of the release blog posts and some people there.
There was one that got into a show real two years ago,
I believe, about three years ago, Rota,
which was an open source game.
And I think that was also featured.
And, you know, it depends on the game exactly.
We have some small demos that we have
on our demo repository and, like, many examples.
Would be nice of having demos of bigger projects
so people can see how they are.
But, you know, there is one popular one
that we should maybe make a little bit more noise,
but I think it's got a three, which is called
a little game called Mario,
which is a game that accepts every PR that you send to it.
It's incredible.
Like, it has a million levels, a million mechanics,
and it's great, you should try it.
But, yeah, not very sensitive at the moment.
Could be interesting to think more about that.
- Hi, thank you for the Q&A first and foremost.
And my question is, do you have any process
for maturing extensions or addons to the core library
or code code?
Can you repeat?
- I mean, do you have any process for,
let's say there's an addon or extension
that is very popular that could be moved
into the core of Godotz.
Do you have any process for that?
- Thank you.
- The recent, I mentioned Jolt a couple of times,
because that was kind of like there was an extension.
And then, you know, it eventually made it to the core.
So I guess it's more like on a case by case basis.
So at the moment, there isn't that.
Our goal is to have a very good plugin,
our GD extension system,
so that you wouldn't feel the need
to include it into core for everybody.
So that means maybe you can download an extension
and do it, like enable it globally,
so that any project that you open already
has that extension available.
And that way will be as close as native
without having to shift this to everybody.
So at the moment, it really depends
if there's something that's very popular,
the passive start thing, for instance,
that was kind of like an extension that we said,
like we think this is better than our current theme.
We include it and then we put it,
but it's a different story to any other kind of thing
that got to the core.
We want to keep the core as small as possible.
And, you know, going back to the other question
that I got, like, if we keep adding things
that not everybody's gonna use,
it's also harder for us to maintain those.
So before accepting something,
we need to make sure that we are able
to support this in the future.
And with many of those extensions,
it's hard for us to say, like, yes, we think we need this
and that we are gonna be able to maintain it.
So making it easier would be like a good middle ground.
Did you have our curiosity, any extension in mind?
Did you need, okay, did you need it?
For that, you know, there's a couple of them.
So we need to pick a favorite sun,
and that's gonna be tricky.
But yeah, no, I would like, for instance,
to have some better Git integration on the engine
that, you know, that everybody uses.
But then again, like, not everybody is using Git
if you see our poll every year.
There's like 20 something percent of people
who are not using it.
But yeah, there isn't any process at the moment.
Unfortunately, our time is already up.
I know that you have many more questions,
but I think you'll be around the day, more tomorrow.
Yeah, if you see me around, feel free to come,
say hi and ask.
And also, if not, on the streams every Wednesday
on the YouTube channel at 5 p.m. European time,
you will be able to ask anything.
And if not, on the forum, you can leave a question there
and it will get answered.
So, yeah, thank you, everyone.
(audience applauds)
- Thank you, Amy.
(upbeat music)
