API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93477
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/godotfest2025-raytracing-is-simple-for-2d-games
Title: Raytracing is simple for 2D games!

(soft music)
- Next up, we have Janus Yago.
- Yes.
- He's the creator of "Blastron Out"
and has also some of you struggle
with using nice lighting for 2D games.
As you might use them for 3D games,
I think Janus has a cool tool set
that will help us make 2D games more dynamic,
especially for lighting.
And I'm looking forward, I hope you too.
Yeah, have fun and thank you Janus.
- All right, thank you very much.
Hello everyone.
Thank you.
So I'm pleased to be here
and thank you for inviting me again.
So last time, I was here 2 years ago,
where there was Kotokon.
And then I was making a little presentation
about a demo scene that I made.
Maybe you have seen this abandoned space of demo scene.
The recording is also alive.
You can recheck the video about how I made it.
But since then, I haven't actually worked on 3D much.
I still have a game to finish the "Blastron Out" game.
And therefore, I've added some cool effects to that
and made this new talk about 2D effects.
So the name of the talk is Ray Racing,
it's simple for 2D games.
And I really, my goal is to make it really simple for you.
And let's see how it turns out.
But as I said, there is all the parts about 3D
in Godot, all the new lighting effects
are mostly coming for 3D.
So I think we should really give the 2D games also,
some love, and try out some Ray Racing on 2D.
So first of all, actually,
these lighting systems are not even too new.
Already in Godot of 3, there is this cool
dynamic lighting system, where you can have dynamic lights
and nice soft shadows.
And these are multiple, like, four layers of shadows,
but it runs really fast.
Like 2.5 millisecond fast.
And this is on my laptop that's on power saver mode.
And as integrated into graphics,
so if some of those frame times are not too high,
it's not necessarily the issue of Godot or its performance,
but it might be my mistake or more over my pretty regular hardware.
But this runs fine, and it's pretty easy to set up.
So you just add points of images or shapes to the other scene.
And to those images and shapes,
you add light occluder nodes underneath.
These light occluder nodes also need to get the shape,
and this process is a little bit tedious.
You need to copy it from the original shape and paste it,
but it can be added.
It can also be added for tile mops and yeah.
So simple, great.
And then points of light sources,
everything just works out of the box, nothing else needed.
Now, since Godot 4 came out already quite a while ago,
I found a post from 2020, from Redus,
that was that Godot 2D engine gets some several improvements
from upcoming 4.0.
And the main headline improvement
was 2D signed distance fields.
And these articles also know that they encourage the community
to take a good use of it and see what they can do.
So in this talk, I'm trying to fulfill this promise
and see what we can do with this signed distance field.
So what is a signed distance field?
It's pretty much a representation of a distance from any shape.
And this signed distance field is created in Godot 4
for those occluder polygons.
So and this is automatically done.
You just need to use it so it takes effect.
So on the signed distance field, this is the same scene,
this is the same shapes.
And on the edge of the shape, it has distance values of 0.
There are also negative values inside the shape.
And the positive values, the distance values
are outside the shape.
And these values are really like the distance,
but in pretty much in pixel scale.
And this means that it goes to infinite,
pretty much whatever size it is.
But just to draw it on the screen,
we need to clamp it to the certain range.
So this is how you do it in cedar.
That's a cedar.
I've added a new canvas layer and a color
rects under it, full screen color rect with the cedar.
And all the upcoming examples are the same way.
Just the full screen color rect with a specific cedar.
And this time, what it does, it has this parameter.
Then it converts to the screen UV coordinate
to the distance field coordinate.
This is necessary because the distance field does not actually
need to match the screen one to one.
In cedar, by default, it's rendered a bit larger.
So you can also sample the distance outside the screen
and can have nice effects that scale nicely.
And then here, this value is sampled from this new coordinate.
And I will divide it by the cutoff so that it's transformed
between scale 0 to 1.
So everything above the cutoff is just clamped white.
All right, easy enough.
There is actually another pretty cool function
built into it as well.
It's the sign distance field normal.
So as you can see, you can also sample the sign distance
field from the normal location.
And if I play into the normal, it pretty much
tracks you towards the closest stage as well.
So it might be pretty useful to optimize these algorithms
later.
So that we also don't know only how far the HIs,
but we can also know pretty much exactly where
the closest HIs by multiplying the normal with the distance
value.
Maybe I will use it later.
And maybe not, we will see.
So what can you do with it?
So some very simple things that we can apply.
We can create ambient occlusion effects.
So what it is, I'm just sampling the sign distance field
here, and then smooth stepping to a certain desired range.
So I'm just taking a part of it that's outside it.
Smooth step is a really useful function in shaders.
It's almost like mixed function, but it's smooth.
It eases in and out.
And here, what's going on, I'm taking it two times.
First of all, it's between the width and zero.
That's the out rate.
And then also, I'm subtracting the inside values.
So it doesn't throw the outline on top of the graphics,
like so, and blending it as well.
And otherwise, I'm just adding in to top of what's
ever rendered.
And some of you might ask, well, it's not ambient occlusion.
It's like drop shadows.
Or if I color it really bright, it's like outer glow.
But really, in 2D, these are the same thing.
If you just zoom it out, it has a nice shadows,
nice occlusion to the edges of the geometry.
So that's why I'm calling it like that.
You can expand on it, throw outlines.
Like outlines.
Quite simple to draw, you just sample the points around.
However, if you want to draw really large outlines,
it can get to be tricky.
And you need to do a lot of sampling.
So that doesn't work out so well with just sampling
the local neighborhood in shader.
However, since we have distance fields,
we can just sample it and smooth step it so that we
have this kind of outline shape.
And yeah, we can go to cool effects with it.
Maybe really, really give it color.
We can draw the outlines on top of the mesh.
Increase its frequencies.
Playing around with shaders is pretty cool.
I recommend everyone to play with their shaders
and see what happy accidents can happen.
So yeah, about the performance as well, a little bit.
You see that the performance has cranked up
to almost 6 milliseconds.
This is because sampling, the sign distance field,
itself is fast, but as you sample the first time,
it actually also needs to generate the distance field.
And this might take a little bit of computing power.
It has this cool jump floating algorithm to generate it.
But it needs to pretty much throw the screen
a couple of times.
It's fast, but it takes a little bit of performance.
So now, let's get to this original example provided
by this code or blog post.
And this is exact code that was given there
to generate this nice angled shadows
on behind your meshes.
I'll just copy and paste it here.
So what's going on here is we need
to find the closest stage.
And we need to find it to a certain direction.
And since we have a certain direction,
not just the closest stage, we need to find--
we need to something more complex.
And the system that's used is called circle or sphere
tracing, depending regarding whether you do it in 3D
or 2D space.
And pretty much you can find any edge in any kind of image.
You even don't need a distance field.
If you just do ray marting, pixel by pixel,
mart throughout the scene until you find the edge.
But obviously, it won't scale very well.
And it will not give you the best performance.
But having the distance field available
allows us to do it much, much more efficiently.
So use this circle tracing, which
means that at any point on this ray mart step pretty much,
we can always really move to the distance
of the closest geometry.
So since we can sample what's the distance in this point,
we know that at least by the distance,
we can sample because--
and we won't hit anything else.
And then it continued until, eventually,
it reaches the final geometry edge.
Yeah, it's much less samples, but still a few.
And this is how it's done.
As you can see, in principle, it's pretty simple.
It just sampled the distance fields.
So let's take a look at this code.
First, it just defines the direction vector.
So from the angle, it multiplies by pi.
Nowadays, we know that there is also a building constant for pi.
So I can replace that.
And then this pretty much moves you
to the radians where the sine and cosine functions
are operating.
And we have a direction vector, a unit vector
with the direction input.
We also can sample the starting where
our starting distance field position is.
And then start accumulating the distance as we step.
So in a while loop, it steps.
In every step, it samples the distance fields
and adds this distance to the accumulation.
Until the distance that it finds is smaller than the threshold,
it has hit inside the mesh where it breaks and returns
the accumulated distance as the one that's gathered.
And here we can also see what the ray marching really means
or what using the ray is just this unit vector.
And we multiply it by distance and always
add it on top of the previous coordinates.
And this last part is just to not throw the distance field
inside.
Note that this one inside the geometry.
So pretty much the same thing that we did earlier with our example.
So yeah, when you're working with shaders,
usually you're thinking the opposite direction,
not how the object occludes the distance,
but instead we just take a pixel and see what occludes
this pixel.
So in this directional shadows, we just
have one direction where it samples and finds this distance
field.
But if you want to create something like ambient occlusion
or ambient light, we pretty much
want to sample all the rounds, the pixels
so they can sample in all directions.
And then we need a method to do it.
So here is the base of my own function.
It's in some step a little bit simpler
so that it also here creates the ray as it did before.
And then in this case, I don't specify the maximum distance,
but instead the maximum number of steps that are allowed to do.
In certain way it's less optimal, but at least it won't allow us
to mask some performance issues.
So it's basically the exact same thing.
I am sampling the distance fields inside the step.
And checking if it has hit something,
if the hit occurs, I've just set the radiance color to 1.
And return.
And if not, then I will increase the position by the step
and moving on to the next trace.
Yeah, that's pretty simple.
And by changing the max step, we can also
see that there is a certain threshold where there are too few steps.
So the sphere tracing won't reach the actual geometry
when it's too far away.
But it pretty much gives you as a good view
of how many calculations are done.
In this case, for every pixel, 46 steps.
Good.
So let's expand on it.
And I really hope you didn't mind my little silly
indentation here.
It really holds my slides together.
Since the next slide, we can see what has actually changed.
And the next step to improve it is just to add more rays.
So I define a number of rays, we want a trace.
And to do that, so we have the ray count.
I also calculate what's the angle between the different rays
of the-- by having this tau over ray count.
Tau just means two times pi.
So it's like a full circle.
And I have added this outer loop that loops over the ray
count in this case.
It also breaks early if the distance field is inside the mesh.
So just to see it a bit better.
And then I calculate this exact angle
by multiplying the step value by the tau of ray count.
And we have the internals have remained the same.
Just in the end, I'll sum up all the radians
and divide it by the ray count.
So I can clearly see how many rays it has.
And as we can see, now it can get pretty slow.
For like 100 rays, it already takes 70 milliseconds.
And this is still in double digits,
but reading single digits, digit speed.
And increasing the max step won't help it either.
So we need to find some performance optimizations.
But first, let's optimize the look,
because our surfaces are not all white.
Instead, what we can do, we can sample--
instead of just adding white color,
we can transform back to the regular UV space
from the after the ray marked as finished.
And get where the ray ends.
And then sample the screen texture.
Yeah, we have this screen texture here as well.
And what was actually thrown the color on the background.
And yeah, that works well.
And now it starts shine already pretty nicely.
But I've also summed up the number of steps
I'm actually making in each position.
And if I crank it up, you can see that it's pretty white,
which means it does the maximum number of steps.
So in this case, when the color is white,
it does 42 times, 32 samples in for every pixel.
So quite, quite a lot.
And by cranking it up, I can thank the FPS again.
It's always fun.
Yeah, but I think the more critical issue to worry about
is that at the moment, the age that we are detecting
is kind of-- it's not the exact color.
It's a little bit noisy.
And that's because while the ray marching ends us,
usually, exactly on the age of this surface,
the age is oftentimes idealized.
And the background also bleeds in.
So a simple fix to it is just, once we have restate,
we had a little extra buffer, like two pixel lengths.
So that we are actually sampling inside the light source
and not from the middle of summer.
That's one thing.
Another thing is that it's hard to see.
But if I set the ray count to 3, it's actually visible.
Not really well is that those lines are actually
a little bit bubbly.
And that's because I'm still previously
just accumulating the starting position.
And it has those floating points errors
when I just always, always adding a certain distance
to the starting point.
So instead, we can do it a little bit differently,
a little bit better.
We can just keep the starting location at the same
and accumulate the floating distance.
So this will get rid of those floating points,
accumulative, like errors.
All right, so now looking pretty good,
let's get to the next step and see what
bears the main performance issue,
because it's still pretty white and does a lot of samples.
And in this naive approach, what actually happens
is that for every ray that's going outside the screen,
it just goes infinitely as far as there are steps to do.
So and usually pretty far.
So what we can do, we can transform the screen
UV a little bit earlier.
And check is the ray actually inside the screen.
If it leaves it, then we just stop the ray march.
And yeah, that's already, as you can see,
by doing this simple optimization,
let's crank the numbers high.
100 ray counts, steps also like 100s.
It's 6FS, not too nice for my PC.
OK, I made it too low, so let me restart the demo.
One moment, please.
I just deleted the insight, I guess.
So where were we?
Yeah, here.
So once again, let's make it like 100 milliseconds,
8 frames per second, that's fine.
I mean, not too fine.
So putting back in, we are right on the 40 frames per seconds
mark, so biggest optimization done.
Not really an optimization, more like my own bug that it
originally had.
So all right, that can be doable.
It already looks nice and smooth.
And 30 frames per seconds might be OK frame rate for certain
devices, but I guess gamers probably
like to have a little bit more.
So what else can we do instead of just
ranking up the rays to capture every point?
And probably the simplest optimization is to noise.
So we can randomize where exactly we are sampling.
I hope the noise is also visible on the large screen.
And here, I have just four rays.
Everything is exactly as it was in with just four rays.
But for those rays, I'm adding a little bit of noise
to the starting location of the rotation, or the rotation,
so that now it's nice and kind of blends in into the noise.
And yeah, it runs nice, 60 frames per second.
No issues there.
But the noise is still, for me, it's pretty distracting.
So let's also see the noise.
This is what the noise looks.
And I've just found a like some block post node, some hash
functions for noise.
If you check from the shader toy algorithms,
they oftentimes have something similar,
where you multiply the coordinates by really large numbers
and then take the sign of it and then the fracture.
So yeah, it looks like a noise, but it's really not
a uniform or really not a really cool hash function.
So you can clearly see that it has some noise in it.
But that's solvable.
We simply need to change the coordinate a bit,
maybe scale the UV scale up out, like 101 maybe.
And now it starts looking like a nice noise.
I can't determine any patterns anymore.
I also had to scale the time.
Otherwise, if you just scroll, like take the hash of this time,
otherwise you can see the noise scrolling,
but if I hash the time as well, then now it
looks like a white noise, and that's good.
And yeah, it works, but it's a bit noisy.
Let's decrease the ray counts as well.
So what else can we do to really easily improve that?
And maybe we can use a different noise.
And to know what other noise is often
used to solve that such noise issues.
Well, burning noise is usually very large, like shape,
and it might look cool.
But I guess it also has a very distinct pattern
that's usually displayed in my larger scale.
So probably not burning noise any other cases.
Blue noise, exactly.
So that's regular noise.
The main issue is it's completely random.
It has some larger, like darker and lighter spots.
So instead, we need a blue noise.
So where can we find the blue noise?
Blue noise is not a noise that you
want to calculate in real time.
It's really slow to do.
So typically, we need to find some kind of a texture
to sample it from, so it's pre-calculated.
And when I search from the Google Blue Noise texture,
the very first link is from Kalino, from Hugo.
Oh, cool.
Let's see what's in this-- who was-- who was a library.
And it's different blue noises in different resolutions.
So yeah, just pick one and add you to Shader thanks
to Hugo.
So it seems that the open source world is pretty small.
So let's see.
Here, I still have four rays.
Just replace the noise sampling with--
like, hash function with sampling the noise texture.
Everything else is still the same, sampling the noise
texture, and adding some time to that UV value on top.
And now, overall, we can't see the noise very well.
If I watch it really closely, it's visible.
And definitely, if I make a still image of it,
the blue noise can be visible.
But it's pretty much so basic for us.
If I move it right to the left, you
can probably see some noise now, but maybe not.
So yeah, it looks nice and almost noise-free,
because we're using such a good noise.
And that's what the noise looks, in this case,
almost invisible.
So what's next?
Maybe the performance is still not the best.
How can we improve that?
And when I look back on the original profile view,
then the main issue is where the most performance
is lost near other surfaces.
So we don't need to do so many samples when the point is
far away from the mesh.
But when the sample is near a surface.
And that looks a little bit silly.
It should be like the sampling-- we
are sampling the point right near the mesh.
Why does it need to do the most samples there?
Can someone guess why we need to do most samples
near our geometry?
Because the circles are smaller.
So you have less distance that you cover.
Yeah, it's less persistence.
But we are very much should also find it sooner.
So the actual reason is that we are doing the rays
in all directions.
We are also doing the rays on the sideways
and on top and bottom.
And when the ray is very close to the surface,
but not touching, then we need to do a lot of samples
for this ray.
Because we can only sample in very short steps.
So let me see what we can do for it.
It's a little bit of a hack solution.
But we can have a specified max step.
And so when I'm very close to the surface,
I can make bigger steps.
Let's see the bog view.
OK, here it maybe shows it better.
And pretty much I can see that if I haven't got much closer
to the surface with my last step,
then instead I can do a little bit bigger step.
And as you can see, by increasing the step size,
it kind of teams down the complexity.
And it gets much faster.
But it also has a down side.
So if the step is too large, it can start showing some artifacts.
So if those optimization steps are too long,
then we might miss the surface altogether.
That's where probably using the normal information
might become handy to improve it further.
But to be honest with you, I didn't
have time to try it out yet.
So I will leave it up to you as your own exercise
to see if maybe the steps can optimize even further.
Now it's pretty fast.
It runs on my low end laptop with like 9 milliseconds.
It's surprisingly slow even.
But it's doable, and we can add it to just add it
to the background and get the regular limits
together with the nice global lights.
But now what you might ask me, or what you were thinking
about today, is that that's not radiance cascades.
So you have all heard this cool new features
of radiance cascades.
Path of Exile used it, for example.
Or recently, I think they developed this system.
So why aren't we using that?
And the easy, simple solution is that that will go outside
the boundary of simple.
So it's a little bit more technical to implement.
But I can give you a quick overview what it does.
It uses this little behavior that when we're sampling
the occluders that are close to the objects,
then we can do much fewer radial samples.
And when we are sampling things that are farther away,
then we need to make more samples,
but we can do it to much lower resolution.
So the linear distance of this shadow Penumbra area
is pretty blurry in there.
And what it does, it very creatively divides
these longer rate races and shorter rate races
into very small resolution, but many long traces
on very narrow area, and 10 gradually shorter traces
to the closer areas.
And plants them together in the process.
Overall, complexity of it is similar to doing 16 rate samples.
So same as if I would crank up this parameter here to 16.
It's still for making the rate races relies on the distance
field, it's just additional optimization on top of it.
But with this optimization, it also
has some sort of artifacts and issues
that needs to be solved that can have some simplistic distinct
like halo, halo, around ages, and there are solutions
to fix it, but these are outside the scope of this little talk.
However, Godot is not alone.
There is actually a--
someone has already implemented it.
There is this radiance cascade for Godot.
And you can try it out.
And get even faster running, like global lighting this way.
All righty.
So finally, where my game comes into the system,
because this example right now was playing around
with this new Godot for distance distance fields.
However, I have a little secret.
The blaston out is still made in Godot 3.
And I don't have any distance fields there.
And now it's all a secret.
It still uses the TLES2, so all the effects--
I would like to keep that this way.
And all the effects are relying on very simple calculations.
So what I did, I begin by also--
I've wrote this as a ship space.
And basically, this rate racing works on pixel level,
where I have two masks.
One mask is from all the occluders, all the ages.
And dynamically, I also add the light sources
on top of this mask.
And then there is another mask about the background.
And for the age mask, I want to create these distance fields
so that I can have this optimized cone racing.
Now, the problem with it is that when
I tried the jump floating algorithm,
it didn't really work really well on TLS2.
And the problem is that I can't use very high density
textures, so I can't-- here's like floating point textures.
And having this eight bit better channel textures
don't have that resolution needed to run this algorithm nicely.
So instead, what I did, I just created
my very simple own distance distance fields that
just expands like five pixels outside the area.
And so yeah, I was able to do it in a single pass.
It's just a few samples.
And moreover, I am storing the distance field
in the output channel of this texture
and the color value in the color channels.
And what it allows me to optimize a bit
is that I don't need to sample the color texture separately.
I can simply sample the distance field texture.
And when it's close enough, it gives
me the color in the same sample.
And yeah, for this pixel-scale screen,
it was really easy to just draw 100 ends.
Like even having those smaller steps,
like five pixels long, was enough to have relatively fast
speed.
And then finally, I have another confession.
Although it works pretty nicely in real time,
it's a huge waste of, like, lap the battery power or graphics
card might make too much noise if it gradually
needs to render this art every frame.
So I pretty much bake the entire lighting at once.
And when the light changes, I just
blend between two different frames.
And by doing it, it also allows me to sample it
in really, really large scale.
So seeing how it looks in plus or not, let's open it up.
I really should turn the power saver mode off.
So yeah, to have any questions, maybe you can take the questions.
We might have one time for one or two.
And here I'm turning on different lights.
And then it looks pretty nice.
Yeah, it was a great talk.
Thank you for that.
I got a question.
So in the traditional Godot to the lighting system,
you have, for example, unshaded materials.
You can just set canvas material to unshaded.
And that works well.
How would you do this in a SDF-based lighting system
to have individual sprites being shaded,
where there's unshaded by SDF lighting?
Yes, so currently, the only solution that I know of,
maybe I haven't seen the recent developments,
but it is to use those light occluder polygons.
So you need to have some polygon shapes
to generate the scientists' fields.
But what you can do-- and there is actually even a macro for that.
So if you select your sprites, there
is this menu where you can generate the occluder polygon
for this sprite.
It might not do it very precisely.
It might be quite low poly shape.
And you need to hand tone it and correct it.
But you can automatically generate those shapes
for the regular sprites, yeah.
All right, are there some more questions?
Are you still have 10 minutes to launch?
Wonderful talk.
This talk kind of blew my mind.
And I realized I'm completely unprepared
for what was going on.
But a couple of quick questions.
One was, how did you get the shader code to show up
in the editor?
It looked like your presentation was in Godot,
which is fantastic.
And then secondly, what would be a good way
to get started with this in the most basic level?
This is really some pretty advanced and awesome stuff.
Thanks.
So how did you get the shader in this slide, pretty much?
Yeah, so I coded a little plug-in.
And let me see if I have time to show that.
Yeah, that's it.
That is one.
And I pretty much made my own little class.
Let's sample ray tracing.
So yeah, I have my own--
it uses the code built-in nodes.
code has this text editor.
It's already provided by Godot.
So I simply--
OK, it's in the UI, right?
So I made my own little script that just takes the shader
code, inserts it to the text edit field,
whatever it was called.
And then when I change the text,
it applies the changes back to the shader.
And all the coloring and cool features,
these are all built into this text box, pretty much.
So it's really awesome, but Godot UI provides.
All right, thank you, Janos, for this awesome presentation.
I also have to say it's awesome to have it in Godot.
Yeah, we're going to have lunch break now.
And afterwards, we're going to hear from Chris
about how they added multiplayer to Domekeeper.
Hope to see you all back in this room.
And another applause to Janos.
Thank you very much.
