API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93480
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/godotfest2025-tilemaps
Title: Tilemaps

[MUSIC PLAYING]
Like for many, my journey with Kado started with a 2D game
that involved tile maps.
But that's a few years ago.
And things have changed since then.
Tile maps got a lot more powerful.
And no one than Jackie Coates is better suited
to explain what's the current status.
You might now hear from Twitch or YouTube.
And please welcome Jackie Coates.
(audience applauding)
- Hello everybody.
This is so weird.
I'm so used to just like a number on Twitch saying something
and I don't even wanna count you guys right now.
(laughs)
But anyways guys, hello everybody.
You might know me as I was introducing Jackie Coates.
Yeah, I do YouTube.
I do Twitch.
I'm a content creator.
I've been using Godot now for about four years
and I'm loving it.
Are you guys having a good time at the convention?
You're nice?
Yeah.
It's really like, look at this beautiful room.
Wow.
(laughs)
All right you guys.
So, quick goals.
I'm gonna start off the talk
by just giving a basic overview of tile maps
so that you're not completely lost.
Yeah, I wanna expand your toolkit
so you can see all the use cases for tile maps
'cause I've actually used tile maps in games
where I didn't know I would.
So I kind of went to see the possibilities
and have a deeper understanding
on how the tile maps work.
And yeah, also to know what to expect
when you're making a big game
because I've made a couple games
that have many thousands of tiles
and I've ran into many crazy issues
and it's made me so thankful
for some updates that happened
because a lot of the things I'm gonna talk about
wasn't possible in other versions of Godot.
So yeah, let's all,
and I also want you to know where tile maps fall short
so that you can plan around such issues.
And yeah, let's get started.
Yeah, again, who am I?
What do I do?
So yeah, when I was at home writing this thing,
I was like, who am I?
(laughs)
But yeah, I kind of introduced myself in the beginning,
but I just love game development.
It's so cool.
It's like the ultimate expression of human creativity.
And I think we're all...
I already know like so many of you are cool
because you're into game development
and it just shows that you're creative people, you know.
And yeah, I really love game development.
Like I identify with that.
Like I'm a game developer, it's cool.
I love traveling and talking to different people.
Like please, if you see me outside,
do not hesitate to walk up to me,
ask me questions or just chat.
Like I would love that.
And I know it's a little nerve-wracking,
but I love talking to people.
So yeah, feel free.
All right, I just posted some screen shots
of my HIO games.
I started in Godot 3.
Some of them are mobile.
This is the boot.
I don't know if you guys know
the boog-dody and nature spread.
That was kind of terrifying 3D model.
This was actually my first Godot game.
I made it like in three-ish days.
Jumped-y-doodles, just a simple platformer.
Yeah, some of these I made in teams of game jams.
Moon Bunny Awakening was a really cool game jam game.
I don't know.
I've also done a lot of devlogs for these games.
So if you're interested, you can check out my YouTube channel
and see how they were made.
Gnomes of War, mobile game,
you can get it on the Android store.
So yeah, I've been making a lot of games
and I've done thousands of experiments
that haven't made it to HIO.
And I haven't actually published a game on Steam,
which I really want to, but
still these experiments are super vital
and they help me, like now when I work on games,
the process is just super quick
because I've had all of these experiments.
So I really urge you guys to just experiment,
don't get too caught up on publishing a game,
like have fun with game development as much as possible.
If you have the budget to do that,
I know some people have different budgets and stuff.
It's not always the best experiment, but yeah.
Yeah, here's a tile map.
I did this, I don't know if you have,
do you guys see the devlog Logan video,
the 40-hour game jam?
That was a really cool project.
We all use the same tile map.
And yeah, like my experience with tile maps,
starting off this game and setting up everything
just was so quick because it gets really faster
as you use tile maps more and more.
And yeah, this was a turn-based game
and it was, yeah, a little bloody.
Okay, yeah, here is another.
I think it's really good also to recreate
games you've already played.
So I made this in six and a half hours on a live stream.
And this is Terraria.
It's very yeah, you can look at him,
but it was, it's still a fun experience.
Like the first game I ever made was Mario.
So it's like, I really urge you guys
to just like recreate games,
even if you're recreating little things,
little systems within games
because it really expands.
You get to think how they made certain decisions.
You can see the game design and yeah, I've done Terraria.
I did a little darkest dungeon experiment.
Don't starve and yeah, it's always super fun.
Sometimes I need to not recreate games
because it's just too fun.
So yeah.
So here is my, one of my projects.
It's gone through many names.
If you catch my live streams, many,
one name I probably shouldn't say on stage here.
(laughs)
Yeah, the first iteration was full procedural generation.
So all the tiles, there was trees,
everything fully procedurally generated.
And then I was like, oh, okay.
Like that was really fun messing around
with noise and everything.
But then I was like, okay, let's,
I like the procedural generation.
It gives really interesting looking continents and stuff.
So this is actually semi procedural generation.
So I'll go more in depth into how that is possible later
and why you should do it and kind of the differences.
But now the game, it's more like all no procedural generation.
I'm like chunking it and I'm setting each tile myself.
So it's interesting to like the stages I went through,
but still the lessons I learned
throughout each stage helps everything.
So I think it was fun.
So why should you care about tile maps?
So yeah, they're very powerful.
They could be used in use cases that you wouldn't think about,
which I'll go over in a bit.
Super easy to just create procedural generation,
especially when you're using these Godot noise textures.
And also grid maps, the 3D grid maps.
I don't know if you guys have played cassette beasts,
but cassette beasts was made using grid maps in Godot.
I'm not sure how supported it is right now,
but if you don't feel comfortable with tile maps,
try using grid maps.
You'll see like a lot of similarities there.
So it's, and it's also super fun.
And right now there's like a 2.5D revolution.
There's so many games coming out.
Okay, I don't know what that was.
Yeah, so here is a little project I did using grid maps.
And yeah, it was fairly simple to set up
and it's super fun messing around with that.
All right, so let's go over a basic understanding
of tile maps.
So you don't confuse the tile set and the tile map.
It used to be tile map, now it's tile map layer.
Only difference is that it's just one layer.
And so the tile set is your library of tiles.
So it could hold patterns,
information about the tile size, the tile shape.
It's a resource, so you can save it
and use it on different tile map layers.
And it's important to like have a clear understanding
the differences, because sometimes when you're trying
to look for specific information,
you don't, like, and you open the documentation
for the tile map layer, you're like,
where's this variable?
But actually you have to go into the tile set
or maybe you need to get the tile data.
So it's just important that you compartmentalize,
okay, what data am I getting?
Am I getting it from this or this?
So that's just kind of important.
Also the difference between map position
and local position.
So local position is the normal position you use
when you get the global mouse position.
So as you can see the mouse, like, okay,
zero, zero on the top left corner.
And tile sizes are 16 by 16,
so that position right there is 38.24 by 29.
I just kind of give it a guesstimation.
And you can see that they are floats,
so it's a vector two, that's important.
But when you look at the map position,
which is very important when you're using tile maps,
that same position is two, one,
because you're taking into account the tile size
and everything.
So your tile size doesn't need to be 16 by 16,
it could be 32 by 32, 64 by 64,
but these functions automatically convert that.
So you can put, like, if you want the map position,
you can just put the global mouse position,
it'll return that, and it's important to know
it's a vector two I, so that there's two integers,
that's why it's two, one.
Yeah, tile size, those are the positions.
So, yeah, if you have a tile map layer,
you can easily get the tiles using that.
Alrighty, so within the tile set,
there's three different tile types,
you have your normal tiles right here,
they're basically images to the size of that you have.
So they're super fast, simple images, decorative,
here are terrains, they're kind of a pain to set up,
you need to do is bit mask, but they're beautiful.
It also saves a lot of times, 'cause technically,
you don't need terrains to do all of these images,
you could slowly put the tile pieces together,
but that takes so much time, so that's why we have terrains.
The reason why they're so slow,
is because if you look at one tile,
it has to check each tile around the tile
to see which one to use, so it's like constantly checking
a bunch of tiles, so once you get into scenes
with thousands of tiles, thousands by thousands,
it takes a long time to even draw it,
like you should try just drawing a super large square
using terrains and you'll see that they're very slow.
Yeah, and also, not only to place the tiles within the scene,
but if you have a scene with big terrains
and you're playing the game, it's actually much slower,
so not only to place it, but to be in the scene,
that's why I'll go maybe a little bit later over that,
but that's why it's actually good to chunk them,
because if you have like a large terrain,
and if you cut them up into multiple tile maps
and multiple scenes, it actually runs a lot faster.
And yeah, this is the thing most people are surprised
about, the scene tiles, so you could see
I set the grass and I set the trees all using tiles
and they are the scene tiles and they are,
they're stand-alone, own, good-o scene,
it's very easy, super powerful, of course,
if you don't like the grid-like pattern within the scene,
you can, you know, you can make a little function
to slightly alter the position and you can do stuff like that,
but scene tiles are super cool,
but at the end of the day, if you look at the tile map,
well, maybe let's not do that,
but if you look at the tile map layer,
and your game is running and you place scene tiles,
it literally just adds that scene as a child
of the tile map layer, whereas tiles,
normal tiles and terrains do not do that,
they don't add it as a child of the tile map layer.
So yeah, here are terrains,
so you don't wanna hand place all of these,
you wanna just easily draw it,
so this is what the bit mask on the terrain looks like,
so you can see I have terrain set,
this is water and grass, so you can see here is the water,
and up there you can see it corresponds to that,
and yeah, it takes, if you have a lot of terrains,
this is kind of annoying to set up,
I will show you later on some plugins,
make it faster, but yeah,
that's kind of how you set up these rules,
and this is called a three by three minimal,
so it's 47 tiles, and yeah,
I'll also show you another tool to make it faster
to draw that because you don't wanna be drawing
47 tiles for each of your different terrains,
but I don't know, I just, I love how that looks,
it's like the water in the grass, so yeah, yeah, yeah,
so here is, it's a GitHub website that you can use,
so basically instead of drawing these 47 tiles,
you can draw just this, so you put it in there,
and you put four by four plus,
and then you see it exports it like that,
so you need to also test it,
so you might have to make some adjustments
to the tile that you've drawn,
but this just saves so much time,
it's an amazing tool, yeah.
And cliffs are just so satisfying to place
when I was working on Lawcraft, it took me,
like I was thinking about cliffs for so long,
and I did not know how to do the bit mass
because you know, it's kind of different,
they're like very tall, and just one day it came to me,
I was like, okay, I can basically make the,
where you see the elevation, that's basically just one tile,
I think I'll highlight it right now, so yeah.
You can, when you're setting up a tile,
you can click on it and stretch it,
so those are all just one tile, so it,
you use the normal, you know,
you see the bit mask is exactly the same,
and it's treating this as one tile, you've just stretched it,
and yeah, they're really nice to place.
Okay, so before you, you know,
think about doing procedural generation and stuff like that,
you need to really think about what tiles
am I gonna be using, am I gonna be using terrain,
if you don't use terrains, then most of your issues are,
you have much less issues because terrains,
like I said, they're super slow,
they add a lot more complexity,
so what tile types do I use, how big will the scenes be?
I know it's hard to think like,
what does a 1000 by 1000 world look like?
So yeah, just do little experiments like that
to see how big it needs, because it's like,
do you really have to have an open world,
like is it okay to just have small scenes that connect,
like you, 'cause if you want to have an open world,
it's completely possible with Godot,
there's a lot of things you can do to make that happen,
but it's like, do you want to do that,
like that's an important question to ask yourself.
Yeah, so do you need to update?
So in my game, you can chop trees,
the trees, you're updating the scene tile,
you can cut the grass, like even something as simple as,
okay, you have a grass terrain,
do you want to dig and then they'll be sand?
That's actually much harder than cutting a tree,
because cutting a tree, you're just deleting the scene,
but if you're digging the grass and you want sand to come over,
you're updating the terrains,
and the terrains, they kind of update as a chunk,
so yeah, that adds a lot more complexity,
and yeah, chunk or not to chunk.
When you have big terrains and big worlds,
you're probably going to want to chunk it up,
so yeah, here's some procedural generation.
Yeah, we use noise to get that,
I'm sure you've seen things like that,
so yeah, it's important to speed up the time
it takes to test out your noise,
because there's some variables in the noise,
like there's the frequency,
there's different noise types, fractal,
all different things you can mess around with,
so it's always good to use the noise resource,
you just basically get, go in good dough,
get a texture 2D, and then add a fast noise,
fast noise light, and then mess around with the variables,
and yeah, just try to get the things you want.
And yeah, you can also use multiple noise textures
to get different biomes, you can't really see so much,
but there's darker grass and lighter grass,
so one texture is for the altitude,
it just says, oh, is this water, is this land,
and another texture is for the temperature,
and I think I actually had three textures here,
and another one for temperature and humidity,
and you can do really cool biomes.
And yeah, also, before you jump straight
into doing procedural generation,
I think it's, I learned this very late,
it's super important to do handcrafted first,
so think about what do I want the level to look like,
what do I want this to look like,
and to first place everything down,
and then you can base your procedural generation
off that, mock up that, that saves a lot of time,
because yeah, you're messing around with a lot of numbers,
tweaking different values, but it's so much easier
to have a basis for that.
Okay, and yeah, here is the different values
you can tweak with the noise,
see this is on texture 2D, or yeah,
and you can see we have the fast noise light,
simplex smooth, you can just change it,
and do tool scripts to update what that looks like,
and I'll show you some tools, this is a tool
I made to test out what's different
noises changes, how it changes it, and everything.
Yeah, I would have done, I did this a while ago,
I don't think I even used tool scripts,
I think I was just clicking buttons within the runtime,
so if I were to do this over,
I would definitely use tool scripts,
but it's also important to create tools
to really get your areas looking the way you want it,
but also don't spend too much time on your tools,
so yeah, you can see I even show what percentage
or the biomes that I have, and yeah, I think it's pretty cool.
So yeah, get comfortable with tool scripts.
Yeah, and this is the only way that you can do
semi-procedural generation, because like,
okay, semi-procedural generation is when you
procedurally generate it, and then you edit it,
so the way you do that is you,
'cause the tool scripts, it basically runs in the editor,
you don't need to run the scene in the game,
it's running in the editor, so yeah,
you run the procedural generation,
all the tiles pop up in the editor,
and then you can just edit it the way you want,
so using tool script, that's the only way to do that.
Saving time and development is priceless,
and here is a super simple tool script
you can do to just mess around with it,
so this is actually, I think it's fairly new,
they came out with this in like 4.4 or something,
but yeah, you could just, you have to put this
at tool at the top, and this is a button,
it shows up in the inspector, you can click it,
and it'll just print hello world,
and yeah, you don't need to run the game,
you can just click it in the inspector,
run whatever, you know, you can run your
procedural generation function there,
pop it up in the editor,
and yeah, I messed around with tool scripts
much later than I would have wanted to,
they're very easy, and I really urge you to try them out,
so yeah, like I said, the full procedural generation,
semi procedural generation.
So, proc gen, what's taken into account,
so what tile types do I need, I went over that before,
and how will I save and load tiles?
So, there's two ways you can go about saving and loading them,
so you could have the world already built in the game,
and you can just basically edit the deleted,
so like for instance, let's say you have your forest,
and let's say you chop down some trees,
so then you're adding that to a delete dictionary,
they chop this tree down, they chop that tree down,
maybe they planted a tree here,
so the next time you load the game,
it's not loading the whole tile map,
it's just loading, okay, they chopped that,
they chopped that, they added that, so that saves a lot of time,
but if you think of it over time,
you're gonna be editing so many things,
so it slows down as time goes on,
so yeah, you could just load all of them,
so make tools to test different things,
and also if you're doing like a semi-procedial generation,
don't have like a giant landscape in your scene
when you're testing things,
because it just makes Godot super slow,
and yeah, just start with super small sizes,
and yeah, before Proctend do handcrafted,
talked about that, okay, and if you have enemies
that need to do pathfinding,
you need to chunk the nav navigation regions,
so I don't really use,
there's nav regions that you can draw onto the tiles,
and I don't use that, I use these nav regions,
and it wasn't possible to actually chunk them up
because you couldn't have two adjacent nav regions before,
but in 4.3, I believe it was Smix 8,
he added that, that was a really nice thing,
because if you think about it,
when you place anything on the ground,
the enemy pathfinding needs to be updated
'cause they can no longer use that,
so it's very expensive,
that's why people say don't build
an open world survival building game,
because if you run into problems like this
where it's just, it's very difficult to optimize
and deleting, updating the tile map with enemies,
just it's a headache.
So yeah, this is a cool thing I did with threads,
so I know what you might be thinking, okay,
terrains are slow, why don't I just pop up a thread,
why don't I just set the tiles with the thread,
so you can use threads to set tiles,
but the tile map cannot be on the scene tree
when you're setting the tiles,
'cause there's a lot of corruption that happens,
it's not thread safe to do that,
but in this project, what happens is when you load the world,
let's wait for it to loop,
so you can see these are not terrains, they're normal tiles,
so it's just loading tiles,
and in the background, the threads are creating
the terrain tile map layer,
and then when it's done, then it's adding it to the scene tree,
and that's thread safe,
because the threads are doing the work
before it's added to the scene tree,
so you can do little tricks like that to speed it up,
and the user's not gonna care that much,
well, ugly tile for six seconds.
Oh yeah, this is important,
so Groud is a very big contributor to the tile map,
so if you ever run into an issue,
you just blame Groud,
so that's his blue sky, you can write him,
if anything happens,
or there's a lot of other contributors,
but it really helps to have someone to blame,
sometimes it's my fault, like I do admit that,
he does come on my stream,
and yeah, I kind of give him hell a lot of the times,
but he's very patient, so I appreciate that.
(laughs)
Yeah, so here are some plugins and tools that you can use.
I haven't used this LD-TK,
but Groud says it gives you faster terrain,
so it's actually a standalone editor,
so you can place all your tile maps within it,
and then you use a plugin on Godot
to allow Godot to read the files,
so you can try that out.
Groud says it's good.
This automated terrain bit masks,
yeah, my friend made it solar,
and it just makes it very easy
when you have a lot of terrains that you're drawing,
'cause I don't know if you remember,
you need to draw the bit masks to them,
and it takes a long time,
and using this plugin,
you can just go in A-sprite and draw it all in there
and set up the rules,
and it's a lot faster, you can check that out.
Better terrains, I use this very little,
but there's a lot of people that use it,
so I feel the need to mention it here.
When you actually, I think I used it for the Terraria,
the game, it made it much easier to do the terrains,
but yeah, simpler, more flexible rules.
So yeah, now power and powerlessness,
so I'm sure you think like,
oh, using the tile map to set scenes,
wow, that's so cool,
but it actually makes things a little hard
because you can normally get a tile
if you have the position,
but not with scene tiles,
so when you place a scene tile,
you need to catch it,
like you need to have a signal,
child enters scene, catch it,
and then you need to do,
put the location of that scene tile yourself,
so it makes it, it's not as easy to retrieve the scene tiles,
you have to work around that,
but in some cases it can make it easier,
so here is a game I made for the Game Jam,
the Pirate Software Game Jam, it was two weeks,
and I was inspired by Blueprints,
has anyone played Blueprints here?
Yeah, that was a good game, I love that.
So basically how it works,
you open a door and you can spawn
different dungeon rooms,
it could be a monster room,
it could be a shop room,
you have to manage the door placement of it,
and when I was setting up the placing of the rooms,
I was using nodes, nested nodes,
and then I was like wait,
they're in a grid pattern,
so basically this is setting it using the tile map,
and it's using like a 200 by 200,
I don't really remember,
but I put that size in the tile set,
and these are just using scene tiles,
so yeah, some use cases like you wouldn't expect,
but again I need to have a signal to catch it
when it enters the tree,
and oh yeah, that's another thing,
so it makes it more difficult
if you need to input data into the scene,
so it's like if I wanted to say okay,
this room is a reward room,
I had to catch it after I put it into the scene,
so yeah.
Serialization, so yeah,
saving and loading tile maps,
how does that work?
So yeah, there's different ways
you can serialize the tile maps,
I like, when I think of how I did it for logcraft,
I use the dictionary,
which I'll show, yeah, you can see there's a dictionary,
so for each tile type,
and the key basically gives information on retrieving it,
so like the source ID,
you can see the tile dictionary,
there's a vector three,
the X was for the source ID,
the Y is for the atlas coordinate,
and the Y and Z are the atlas coordinates,
and then it's just the position,
and then the Godot could read that information
and place the tiles using that,
so that's one way of serializing it,
and yeah, you need to use these functions,
resource saver dot save,
and you just put your resource in there,
this could be any name you want,
this just puts it on your computer,
and then you load it,
but you need to create this resource,
however way you want,
and yeah, when I was preparing for this talk,
and I was testing a lot of things,
Groud showed me that you could also use patterns to save,
which is really cool,
and it's super fast,
even when you wanna like place the terrains,
I don't know how it works under the hood,
but it actually eliminates the issue
of the terrains taking a million years to place,
even if you have a lot,
like I tested it with a thousand by thousand,
and that's a huge tile map,
like when you're putting the terrains,
it takes like 25 seconds for my computer
to actually register that, maybe 20 seconds,
so yeah, you could use patterns,
so, and the cool thing,
which I didn't expect is that the pattern,
it could have tiles, terrains,
and scene tiles all in one pattern,
so the way you would do that,
let's say I place the pattern in the scene,
so you get pattern,
and then since this script is on the tile map layers,
there's a get used cells,
and it just gets all the cell positions,
it's basically an array of positions of the cells,
like the scene, terrain tiles,
and then you get that pattern,
and then you can just save that pattern,
and then when you wanna load it,
you just set the pattern.
Right now, you have to put the position
that the pattern is,
and then you put that pattern that you saved,
so in this example,
I didn't save the pattern position,
so if you are implementing this yourself,
you'll have to save the pattern position as well,
but this is super cool.
The only downfall that this could have
is that when you put it into a pattern,
then you can no longer get the information,
like oh, these trees have all the positions of the trees,
and all the positions of the water layer,
like it's easier to update,
like let's say you cut a tree
if I just have to look in the tree array,
but if you do it with patterns, you can't,
it's just one array of all the cells,
but you could have a hybrid approach
where maybe you use patterns
and the dictionary way, so yeah.
When I was saving it, it took two seconds,
and when I loaded the 1000 by 1000,
it took seven seconds, which is extremely fast.
As opposed to using dictionaries,
that same thing was,
it took one minute and 12 seconds,
and if you're interested in all of these tests that I did,
you could, I made a GitHub repo,
you could check it out,
and you can see I messed around
with all different ways of saving and loading the things.
So yeah, in terms of logcraft,
my game where I have to update a lot of tiles,
this is a good approach, but like I said,
I would probably test it out using,
like instead of having an array of positions,
I would have maybe like a pattern,
you know, because it's much more faster,
and it still gives you the ability to look it up.
So yeah, I think I'm always a proponent
for people to try to draw their own assets.
It's so much fun, and you really,
pixel art is, it's such an amazing medium
where it's not as daunting as like other art mediums,
you're literally just placing pixel.
I used to use a drawing tablet when I first started out,
but for the past two years,
I literally just use a mouse to do pixel art.
So you do not need any crazy equipment
to start with pixel art.
I really urge you guys to do it also
to get good with the shortcuts on A sprite.
I have binding so that I press S
to lower my brush size D to increase it,
you know, memorizing M.
And like, once you get good at that,
it's so fast to make pixel art.
And I, it's so fun, I love it.
I really urge everyone to try.
I don't, wow, that went up, okay.
Make them yourself, it's fun.
Oh yeah, and you can also go to HIO to get assets.
There's so many different tile maps.
I actually use this one for the game jam
with the dungeon role.
But I also, I actually,
I might in some months spend more money
on tile assets than games.
Because, and it's not that I'm actually using them,
but I'm studying them.
Like, oh, how did they do this?
How did they put this in?
So it's, go through that.
There's a lot of free ones as well.
Okay, even, I believe this one was even free.
I'm not sure, but it could be.
So look at them, you can use them to study.
You can also, you need to read the licenses.
Sometimes, if it's free, you can't modify it.
But a lot of the times if you pay for the asset,
you can modify it and get good at that.
And just copy, it's practice, you know,
do things like that.
So the future for tile maps from what I heard
around the block, there might be like new tile sets
for each tile type.
So instead of just creating a tile set,
you might create a terrain tile set and a scene tile set.
Like, I think that's the direction it's heading
because yeah, the current way that it's using there,
there's, you can't do specific thing like the dual grid.
You need to add other complexity to have that.
I don't know if you guys seen dual grid system.
It's pretty cool.
Yeah, I hope the terrains improve in performance.
And I think in the future, there also might be ways
to store data in each tile, but that does,
I don't know, hopefully if it is implemented,
it's implemented good because that could also
slow down a lot of things.
But yeah, questions?
(audience applauds)
- Please raise your hand, yeah.
- Hi, thanks for the talk.
You just mentioned it and towards the end.
What are your experiences with dual grid,
ups and downsides if you have it?
- Yeah, I forgot who's, what's the name?
Do you guys know the name of the girl who made that?
What's her name?
Yeah, I did, I watched the video.
I was like, whoa, that's so cool.
I also, okay, so when I, 'cause I was thinking
of using it for Lawcraft, so the reason I ended up
not using it was 'cause it's, I like having
the terrain set up in a way where I have grass
and then I can put water on top and it like,
it does it differently depending if I'm putting
water on grass or water on sand.
And with the dual grid system,
I couldn't find a way to do that.
I would have to, I think that was the only issue.
There might have been other issues,
but it is super cool, yeah, that was the issue.
If you don't have like, complex terrains,
I think you could check it out.
There's a GitHub repo on that now.
- Are there other questions?
- Yeah, thank you for the talk.
Have you run into any limitations regarding terrain?
Because as far as I know, there are open issues on GitHub
and I've also opened a few of them,
so I'm sorry for the maintainers.
But have you seen any--
- Like what issue did you run into?
- Yeah, like specifically with drawing terrain,
sometimes it's not exactly consistent
with how the diagonals and transitions work.
- Yeah, I mean, whenever, like a lot of the times
if I run into issues like that,
I either made a mistake in the bit mask
or I have to like adjust the tile set.
I don't know if, I don't know if maybe you did have an issue.
I don't know, but it's very easy sometimes
to just miss little things.
I don't think I've ran into it.
Did you use three by three minimal, like the 47?
Yeah, okay, that's, yeah, I'm not sure about that.
- I haven't run into any, just the speed
that's the only issue I've ran into.
Yeah.
- So now that you're making a semi-procedural map,
how do you handle the chanking
when you hunt craft in things?
And more specifically, how do you handle
the scene organizations in three?
- Yeah, well, actually I'm not making it semi.
I was, that was like a middle transition where I was.
But yeah, now it's, I just have,
yeah, each scene just has all the different layers
that I need like cliff layer, grass layer, floor layer
for like indoor floors, because the grass layer
contains like sand, water, et cetera.
And yeah, each, it does, there's a lot of complexity
actually that's added when you start to chunking
because you know, when you use the,
when you wanna get the map position,
if you have different scenes, then the local is distorted
because like, yeah, you need to find what scene chunk you're in
and then you, yeah, it just adds a lot,
especially when you're also saving data.
So that's something you might run into,
but chunking is very essential with terrain.
So you will have to chunk, yeah.
And just deal with those issues, yeah.
- Thanks for this great talk.
- Thank you.
- If I understood correctly,
you don't use the navigation layer in the tileset
and instead you're drawing in the regions yourself.
- Yeah, exactly.
- You talk a little bit about why not
because for us, the physics layers are working well,
but we are currently also not using the navigation
in the tileset.
I'm curious what your reason is.
- Yeah, I believe I tried to use it a long time ago
and I just couldn't get it to work.
I think it was even like in like the early 4.0.
So to be honest, like I haven't either.
It's on the list to try it out again,
but I couldn't get it to work properly.
Yeah.
(chuckles)
- Another question?
Anyone?
- Yeah.
- So you mentioned tile terrains are slow,
but it occurs to me like 1,000 by 1,000
is it should not be slow.
Like if you're making local modifications,
it needs to check just eight tiles right around it
and can select the right terrain tile just based on that.
So do you have any idea like why that is slow?
Is there something stupid going on inside the engine?
- That's why we have to blame Groud all the time.
(laughs)
No, but it's actually really big like when,
'cause I even, I have a pretty big chunk of my world
and it's 250 by 250.
So it's like four times that.
It's actually a pretty big world.
But I don't know.
I've heard people implement their own terrain system
and that worked for them.
I also know people liked it better in 3.3.
But they just became way more powerful in Gaudot 4.
Like they changed significantly.
So probably, yeah, like there's custom data layers now
and different things like more information.
It's not in each individual tile,
but yeah, that contributes probably.
I don't know, yeah.
- Okay, is there another question?
Over there.
- Hi, Jackie. - Hi.
- So we were just discussing like the how to chunk chunks.
And I was wondering, could you make the chunks
into a separate tile map and then have a tile map
of tile maps?
Would that be a good way to chunk chunks?
- It's definitely worth try.
(laughing)
I think yeah, that could also be.
It's just it gets, sometimes it gets really annoying
when you have like all these scene tiles
that have a lot of information because you can't,
like when you have a very complex scene tile
and you have a bunch of variables,
export variables that you're adjusting,
you can't adjust them when you use them as scene tiles.
You can, but it's like you need to do it after you,
it enters the scene, you need to change everything.
So it's like, yeah, but you need to think about
how many variables you need to change if it makes sense.
Or you can, maybe you could use a resource,
so that would make it easier, of course.
But yeah, that sounds like, that's the thing.
The cool thing about tile maps is that there's so many
different ways of doing many different things,
like don't just watch tutorials
and think that's the only way.
Just experiment with it.
That's the cool part about game development
and programming in general.
There's different ways to do things.
And yeah.
This.
- Is there a final question?
No?
Well, then please give another round of applause
for Jackie Keltz.
(audience applauds)
(dramatic music)
