API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93260
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/godotfest2025-opening-remarks
Title: Opening Remarks

It is so absolutely great to see all of you here today.
I do a lot of talking on stage but today I'm really, really nervous because this is such
an amazing event for all of us, all of us as good-o engine community members but also
as the organizers of this event.
So first of all, welcome to good-o first, the good-o con Europe in '25, the very first
good-o first.
For me personally, all of our team kind of made the good-o con '23 as well, at least our
core team and it was very funny to, or a very good way or a very good-o community way of
getting into this.
It is really a testament for the good-o community.
I was approached by Las Gaves Mule of Eric's Games a couple of years ago, he knew I was
working for Microsoft and he asked, "Hey, can we maybe have a venue for the good-o con
in Munich?"
And I was surprised good-o con in Munich, that is amazing.
I just found my way into good-o and I said, "Yeah, let's figure this out."
I joined the Discord and there was this team already there, I knew basically no one, they
are except Raffa, who you know, a Spikster and we got together without knowing us super,
super quickly and within, I don't know, half a year we organized the good-o con '23 as
a, yeah, basically five people core team and then a couple of more volunteers that all
went together doing that, right?
And I want to give a special shout-out to Sinad, who is part of our core team for bringing
good-o con to Munich back then.
So we got so, so much amazing feedback from good-o con '23.
And we always start, we should probably do this again and we always start because most
of us work in the games industry professionally and we go to a lot of conferences, so we really
wanted to do this during the week and maybe, so it's easier for people to come who work
professionally in the games industry, right? And with all the professional influx of,
you know, in the good-o community, we always thought it should also maybe be a little bit
more towards professional audiences that try to make the money with good-o, try to make
the living with good-o, but also attract the larger good-o community.
And we've seen a lot of professional engagement in the last couple of years and it really
started with the pricing changes unity did just before the good-of has '23.
It was not great for unity and we're all, I think, really sorry for them, but it was,
I genuinely, I'm sorry, that there was this community backlash, but it really helped the
good-o engine, right? And that was just before '23, good-o, con, and ever since we have seen
many, many more games come out with the good-o engine. The likes of, you know, PVKK is coming
out, Slater Spire 2, by Megacrid will be coming out from good-o, with good-o engine.
There has been massive investment also by META and other companies. JetBrains as a tooling
provider announced the sponsorship then Sentry, just this or last week, announced the sponsorship.
So we're seeing a lot, a lot of traction. And we also, Rafa looked into the statistics
for the good-o show reel. And I think it was in '21. There was like a much, much higher
ratio to do games. And now it's much, much more 3D games when you look at the recent
show reel that was released just recently. So yeah, we also had a couple other big kids
like Brotayton, Kazepbeast, who also did get into Xbox's Game Pass, which is a massive
success, I think, invisibility also for the good-o engine. Alright, yeah. Now I just want
to conclude with a lot of thank yous. First of all, our families, many of us have families,
and we have all been doing this as a sidekick basically, right? And they have kind of supported
us a lot, so thank you for them, to them. I also really want to thank your amazing volunteers.
Without all of them, we couldn't have done this. So thank you very much, all of you.
And then, of course, our call for proposals team, who selected all these amazing talks
amongst a humongous amount of submissions. So really, really special thanks to them as
well. And many of them are here today. Welcome, and thank you very much. And then we have
our video crew. The Chaos Computer Club Video Operations Center is actually, again, our
partner in doing video recording. And audio recording, of course, we will be putting all
of our stuff on YouTube in a couple of weeks, probably. We don't know yet when, but thank
you so much to them as well. And then I want to give a special thank you to our
core team, Kirsten Puffinger. She did an insane amount of work on organizing
everything, really, related to talks, managed speakers, built a schedule, organized all
the volunteer relations and operations, and then so many other things. So thank you.
Ben Villing, who did all the sponsorship-related work, business development and finances. So
a lot of the back-end work, he has been talking to so many people, right? And then, again,
you know. Thank you.
[applause]
Raffa, or Pixta, as you know him, Raffa Ellie Picker, did everything related to visuals,
including merchandise, and, again, then some, because we all need to put in some, so many
things in. Thank you very much. [applause]
Then Cenad, or, as you know him, maybe, as Game Dev Cenad, for bringing all the good
Oakland originally to Munich, and then managing all the overarching business administration,
and acting as a RCO for, you know, our company in the background, and carrying all of the
legal requirements and stuff. Thank you very much. [applause]
Matteo Teats, managing the video-related topics and relations with the Chaos Computer Club
Video Operations Center, and so much more. Thank you. [applause]
Miguel Gonzales Sanchez, also known as BitBrain, who built the awesome website and was constantly
on point to update everything during day and night, so thank you so much. [applause]
Ah, there you are. Cenad, please. [applause]
And now, trying to find the right thing. Yeah, I don't know.
[laughter]
But I know what to say about them. So, a big, big thank you to our headline main sponsor,
JetBrains. They did not only, they do not only build amazing, amazing developer tools,
which I'm a big, big fan myself, but also are a very early investor into the Godot ecosystem.
And that is very, very much appreciated, but also, I think, as a community. And, you know,
generally, they seem to believe in a big player as Godot, as a big player in the Godot,
like in the games industry. [applause]
[applause]
At Alice, at the very back, he leads the developer relations team at JetBrains. He also will
be doing a talk called Godot meets JetBrains, building IDE tools for a growing engine, and
will also be part of our file set chat. Godot's next milestone. Thank you very much. [applause]
Thank you very much, JetBrains. [applause]
And also, they were just an amazing partner to work with, or through this. Thank you.
Mike Klubniger, our second platinum sponsor, creator of the hit title, Boxshot Roulette,
is, I think, just extremely thankful to the Godot community. And he wants to give back by
sponsoring this Godot Fest, and by sponsoring the speaker dinner. Thank you very much, Mike.
[applause]
[applause]
Can you stand up so we can see you? [applause]
[applause]
All right, and then thank you to all our other sponsors, to all our speakers, to everyone
involved in making this happen. Thank you so much. [applause]
[applause]
Well, and we all couldn't be more excited to be here with you today for this event. Thank you all for coming,
and please enjoy the first Godot Fest. [applause]
[applause]
One more little thing. So we have photographers here who will be taking pictures and videos of you.
If you do not want to be on photos that are being shared publicly, we have a rainbow tape,
and we would like to ask you to put them around your badge or front if you do not want to be on a public photo.
You can grab this at the reception and do this so the photographers can recognize you on the photos and can sort these out.
Thank you very much. Enjoy. [applause]
I think we have a little break now. Oh, one more thing. Can you totally forget about this?
Can everyone please come on stage to help make this happen? All volunteers, all core staff. Can you please all come?
[applause]
It's the most important thing. [applause]
Come on, listen for again. [applause]
Come on, listen for. [applause]
Can him listen for again? [applause]
[applause]
Thank you very much. [applause]
[applause]
All right, then off to the break. [applause]
[music]
