API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93488
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/godotfest2025-mobilizing-godot
Title: Mobilizing Godot

[MUSIC PLAYING]
So has any one of you a mobile phone?
And if so, did you ever consider making games for it or on it?
I might introduce you to Joseph Hill,
who is not only an active community member helping,
for example, organizing the Godokon in Boston last year.
Notice here.
He also helped funding the submarine company.
And now is working on bringing the Godot engine
to iPhone and iPad.
And he thinks he should consider mobile.
So please welcome Joseph Hill.
[APPLAUSE]
Thank you.
Thanks for that introduction.
I have some mood setting questions,
but like I was sitting here looking at you
thought, this is going to be a very Windows-centric audience.
So I borrowed myself a Windows machine,
and I made sure all my demos would work well on Windows.
So those of you that use Macs, you can tell your friends,
like there's nothing I'm going to say is particularly
Apple-bound, but that's my frame is coming from Apple.
But anyways, another mood setting question.
I just want you to-- you don't have to answer,
but think a little bit about why you're building games.
Ask this question to people.
Ask it here at the conference.
You get a range of answers.
And everybody kind of has their own itch to scratch.
But I think it's important to think about as you think
about this broader question like we had at the panel this
morning about what platforms do you want to target,
what order, how do you want to take things on,
what is your goal, and how can you meet that goal?
So with that in mind, I will tell you a little bit about myself.
I was introduced, but yeah, I'm an organizer of the Boston
Godot Meetup.
And due to that, helped organize the first Godotcon
in the US in Boston earlier this year.
And I work on Sago, which is a product that we announced
at Godotcon earlier, which is Godot running on an iPad.
So if you want to develop games on iPad or even now on iPhone,
we have the engine.
That's not what this talk is about, for the most part.
But it certainly ties into it a bit.
So more relevant to the topic at hand,
my background is largely mobile.
I started-- I was a C# developer,
and I started working on Mono as an open source project
in my spare time, and that got me into the community.
Where Mono, for those of you who don't recall,
that was the original open source implementation of .NET
to run on Linux.
And at the time, getting Windows developers that were all
the C# developers to think about targeting Linux
was kind of a tall order.
And they were like, why would I target Linux?
But then the iPhone came out, and suddenly all the C#
developers were like, can you get me on the iPhone?
Because Microsoft's not going to make that happen.
So we made a company, Xamarin.
We put C# on the iPhone.
We also, through Mono, helped.
In fact, that was what led us to see the opportunities.
The first place we put Mono for the iPhone was for Unity.
They were already using Unity.
Unity was already using Mono, having replaced Python,
interestingly enough.
And they needed help getting around the technical limitations
of the iPhone.
We helped them do that, and then the demand surged,
and we made a company, which Miguel and I sold the Microsoft
and spent some time at Microsoft before leaving to do--
we didn't know what.
So we were pretty excited about Godot.
And Unity created an opportunity for Godot
to see some serious growth.
And so here we are.
So all right, back to questions.
I love pulling the audience.
How many of you are targeting mobile already?
OK, that's pretty good.
I would think with a title like mobilizing
that would draw in a little bit more than the average segment.
But I think this is pretty representative
of the Godot community.
This is the Godot survey from last year.
And I guess it was a yes or no question,
which platforms are you targeting?
And you can see iOS is pretty low.
And Android's not really doing too great either.
It only 30%.
Another way to slice the data is this year's Godot survey,
which kind of asks, what is your intent?
Like, how interested are you in it?
And iOS wins the most actively not interested category,
barely edging out the Epic Games Store.
So anyways, but Android is not particularly high either.
It's kind of just sort of a ho-hum.
But like, why is that?
This seems surprising to me.
This has been surprising to Miguel and I.
So because when you look at the business,
you look at the market, like this is
where the money is being made.
This being it fairly.
And I think this is 2024 data.
So there's a lot of money to be made in mobile.
There's a lot of eyeballs there.
But Godot developers, which I get-- the image
in itself is pretty well-suited to mobile.
But another way to look at it that I
stole the slide from Apple's own presentation,
I couldn't get just the slide, so I had to steal the whole thing.
But anyways, 800 people go to the App Store every week at 800--
sorry, million.
That's important.
And yeah, so like, there are a lot of eyeballs.
There's a lot of opportunity there.
But people-- you people, Godot developers
aren't necessarily going there.
So why is that?
So I went out and looked on Reddit.
I talked to every developer I can.
Everybody I've tried to shop the idea around.
And these are the general answers I get.
And I think they're all pretty valid.
And I think what I'll do is I'll just take them on one
at a time.
So the first thing people claim is that their app isn't
necessarily map well to mobile.
And that could be true.
But the fact is, is if there's a wheel, there's a way.
When there's a breakout success invariably,
you see that people do start thinking about mobile.
And if they don't, somebody else is often
willing to step up.
I mean, go search for any popular game on another platform
that's not in the App Store.
You'll find varying levels of rip-offs of them.
So that's a thing to keep in mind if you're making something
novel.
There are legitimate differences.
When you're targeting mobile, you had simpler controls.
It has to be touch.
It can be landscape or portrait.
And Bugado itself provides the facilities,
if you're not aware.
Emulate mouse from touch works pretty well.
Scaling, if you think up front about your layout,
you can handle both landscape or portrait,
or you can just decide to lock into one or the other.
So there are plenty of genres of games
that really just make sense everywhere,
that if you're working on any of these kinds of games
on the desktop, they probably map well.
There are legitimately genres that maybe don't map as well.
What comes to mind for me is an RTS, especially
if it's a keyboard-heavy one, even or anything
with complex controls that's multiplayer.
So I think there are plenty of first-person shooters
that are successful on mobile.
But maybe you don't want to enable cross-play
between your mobile players and people
that are sitting behind a power station
with a full keyboard mouse setup.
Dealing with Google and Apple is a pain.
Again, we talked about this a little bit
at the panel this morning, but just repeat it
for those that are near it.
Yes, there is an approval process.
Most markets you want to be in, you
do have to go through an approval process.
Apple's notoriously hard on people.
But most of that, generally, is aimed at the larger app space.
A lot of the frustration I think you generally hear
from people about apps publishing through the app store
is that you have to jump through a lot of hoops
around data collection if you're dealing with finance.
So Apple's pretty aggressively interested in game developers,
and it's not as challenging for game developers
to get through approval as it might seem
if you haven't done it.
Platform tax, again, everybody--
one of my favorite ones is when people say, well, it's 30%.
Apple takes a 30% cut, and that's just too much.
And there's a tendency with developers
to optimize for problems they wish they had.
And I feel like this is a definite case of that.
It's like, yeah, if you need to avoid the 30--
when that becomes a problem to you,
that's certainly the discussions are happening
at that level as well.
But if you're a small business, if you're an indie developer,
and you don't have a ton of revenue from your game,
you can get into the small business program.
And that's a 15% cut.
It's a 30% cut, which is pretty reasonable
for what you get with it, which is access
to storefronts in every country, 2 billion devices,
little languages.
I mean, I wouldn't undersell what you actually
get from Apple and Google both in terms
of the facilities that they actually are providing you.
So the next thing-- and I've heard these things directly
from people that have actually made a go
at taking a game and publishing it,
which is that you can't necessarily
take the business model that you have on the desktop
and take it straight to the app store,
because there is a sort of expectation of free.
And that's how you end up with--
so if you have a paid game, you have
to be very successful on another platform
so that the marketing is aware.
If you're a bolotro, yes, you can charge up from it,
because people are going to be looking for it,
and you can charge for it.
But a lot of people just assume that they
have to re-engineer their game to a freemium model
if they want to make money with the game.
And I don't think that's necessarily true.
It's certainly an option, but if you
want to preserve your gameplay and your integrity
and not really change the mechanics to be
around the way the downloadable content or whatever
and that purchases are, there is another option, which
is you can do free trials.
And that's something where you actually
have the ability to control what it is you're free trialing.
Is it a couple of levels?
Is it a limited amount of time?
I mean, you can get creative with that, I think,
because it's really up to you what
triggers actually hitting the paywall.
And then, of course, there's ads.
And I left it off because people aren't excited about ads,
but that's a way to get freemium.
You can pay to remove the ads.
I was talking to a developer that
had a pretty popular puzzle game on the web.
And I was like, why are you not publishing this to the app
store?
And that was his response, is I don't like--
I just like it seems like the only thing that would work
would be ads.
And I don't want to have my beautiful experience
muddied up by having the ads around it.
And I said, I think I almost convinced him.
I don't know if he's going to do it.
But I said, well, what you should do
is you should make the ads part of the game.
And so you could have the option to in-app purchase
to remove the ads.
But you could also say, hey, if you get the high score,
I'll remove the ads for free.
And then it kind of becomes an aspect of everybody
who plays it's trying to get the high score.
If you get it, there's a definite reward.
And your most dedicated players, all they have to do
is get the high score once.
Or however you want to control what the high score is.
And you can probably get a certain amount of volume with ads.
And also, the people that can really appreciate your app
will have a mechanism to get an ad-free experience.
Anyways, that's me just making it.
I'm just shooting from the hips here.
So that's-- anyways, and then the other big one
I've heard is that it's harder to market.
And I mean, it is true.
Marketing is hard.
It's hard everywhere.
But the strategies that you would employ to, for instance,
market your game on Steam are actually
pretty translatable to marketing it to mobile.
It's just a different audience.
I think that there's a lot of people
that drive interest through having the wish list.
Put my game on your wish list in Steam.
Apple has the same thing with the ability to pre-order.
They also have a test flight service that works pretty well
if you want to beta and build up a community of users
and get feedback prior to releasing.
So just be aware that those facilities are there.
So anyway, so I've done my best to address
like what I hear is the main issues.
Maybe if there's other things that are holding you up,
you can share with me what you think they are.
But what I think really is true is
that there's something else that drives people to not
want to be mobile, which is that they're already
comfortable in the space they're in.
The desktop market is big and well established
in North America, in Europe, Lesso, in Asia, Mia.
And so it's easy to just focus on those parts of the world.
But at the same time, going back to those questions
I asked at the beginning, like if you
want to bring the light to all the users you can reach,
there are big parts of the world where mobile is the only game
platform.
Like I have a switch.
I love it.
I don't want to brag, but I also have a PlayStation 5.
But many parts of the world, like having a phone
is the source of all entertainment and functionality.
So yeah, so those people, they want your games as well.
So the other big one, the most legitimate one,
and the one that, of course, I come here
to attempt to answer today, is that there
is also the technical challenges.
And I think this is what is the counterbalance to the momentum.
You develop on the desktop.
It's easy.
You can iterate right there in one place.
And the thought of going and figuring out Xcode or exporting
from Godot to Xcode or to publish to Android
and having to bring up a different set of tools and publishing
and have a pipeline that's a lot more convoluted
is a bit of a put off.
And I think those are legitimate concerns.
And so that is what we're attempting
to solve with Zago today.
We just announced Zago Connect.
I just pushed the blog post live as I was walking up on stage.
But it's up in the asset library.
And you'll be the first people I'm demoing it for.
So let's all hope that goes well.
Here's my demo.
I'm on Windows, so bear with me.
This is not-- OK.
So I have a project here that you might be familiar with,
which is the Kinney Starter Kit.
And via the asset library, I have installed Zago Connect,
which you can see was just--
it's pretty recently published, so it's there.
And when you install that and enable the plug-in,
you get a new tab over here, Zago.
Man, if I knew how to change my screen size, I would do it.
But hopefully you can all see that.
So Zago is this app, which, like I said,
it's a full editor on the iPhone.
But if you're not into writing code on the iPhone
and you want to do it, you want to stay in good O
to do your work, we've added a remote tab at the bottom here.
And when that's on, it advertises itself as being
available.
So if I search for peers--
and we're on the same network--
there it is, OK.
So it found my phone.
And I can now go up to the Remote Deployed button button
that good O already has.
And I can now select my iPhone.
And pushes the-- pushes over the changes, whatever.
And so it also enables on-screen controls.
And I'll show those a bit more in a moment.
But if I-- Kenny's Starter Kit has already configured
for Bluetooth controllers.
So before I turn my back on you, and just
try to explain that whole thing.
So if you have a Bluetooth controller input map already
set up, you can enable through project settings.
I'll show you in a moment on-screen controls, which
provide-- it's part of iOS that it emulates Bluetooth.
So you're getting these controls.
You may not love them.
We'll get to that in a moment.
But it gives you a quick way to take
a game that you've developed with controller support
and get it running on the device.
So if I come over here, I have a breakpoint set,
that coin collect.
And you can see, I'm now able to inspect my stack,
step through code, and continue running.
And I also have the ability to browse the remote scene tree.
And so if I select, for instance, the player here,
I can-- let me see here.
Where is it?
I'm searching for something I shouldn't be searching for.
How do I get rid of that?
No!
Man, what did I do?
Anybody who knows what I've done, you can tell me, why is my--
why is my inspector limited to just the coin here?
Anyone?
Oh, my gosh.
I only did the demo like four times
right before coming up here, so who knows what I did in that one?
All right.
Well, OK.
So long story short, you can, in theory, inspect variables on the--
here we go.
Well, here we go.
Now things are working.
OK.
There it is.
There it is.
And I'm on the camera.
OK.
So if I come in here, this will be--
you'll have to look very closely.
But if I come in with the player selected,
I can change the variables.
And it's all-- it's all live.
So if I want to-- if I want to test how something's behaving,
I have the ability to do that directly.
So as I mentioned, we have on-screen controls
added to the project settings.
So once you install the Zago extension,
if I look for the virtual controller,
you can actually configure whether or not
the controls are visible.
Left thumbstick, right thumbstick, up to four buttons.
And those will just map directly to the Xbox controller
mappings and input maps if you have those set up.
I think one way to view this is it's a facility for moving
quickly.
If you already have that set up, then this
is a way to get over there.
And then you can think about how you might
want to change your inputs.
For instance, if you have mouse look already,
you can use emulate touch.
And then instead of using the right thumbstick,
you would just have mouse look--
would automatically work, which I could probably demo,
but I don't have time.
So I can demo afterwards if anybody wants to see that.
And what else could I show?
I feel like I have like four other demos that are way too big
to get two in three minutes.
And none of them that I can do.
All right, so I'm just going to go back to the slides.
I think I'll call it, and we can do Q&A, right?
You can handle that.
All right, let's do that.
OK, so with that, I will open it up.
I'll say thank you to everybody, and open it up to Q&A.
Yeah, very good.
[APPLAUSE]
All right, I see the first question.
Hi, thank you for your great talk,
and thanks for making Zogot.
I've seen people using it, using game jams and stuff,
and it's a really amazing project.
So just two kind of points.
First of all, I didn't see you talking about the Quest 3
on your slides, or X-word development
as being something that God of developers are targeting.
But it's also-- you know, that's a growing platform,
and we should be trying to make games for X-word.
And also, there's an awful lot of innovation in that space.
So if you want to make like a totally new experience,
which has never happened before, you know,
you can develop it for X-word.
You can have holographic things,
and you can interact with the real world.
So just wondering if you've any thoughts on that
as something that we should be doing more as God of devs.
And just related question, I've seen some devs
on YouTube complaining about God of Android performance.
God of three apparently is faster than God of four for Android,
and I'm just wondering if you've any thoughts on that.
Well, I can speak to the first one definitively.
I probably can't speak as well to the second one.
But-- so when Miguel and I decided to do this ago thing,
we were actually looking at the Vision Pro.
We knew it was coming out, and we
were starting to play with the SDKs.
And so it was good timing that Unity
said that that would be a good time for us to check out Godot.
And so we definitely-- so I think the area of VRXR,
that is something Miguel and I are very interested in being
in that space, and getting Zago onto iOS and iPadOS
is kind of a necessary step on that journey,
and also happens to have a much larger market.
And I also think that you make an excellent point with Quest,
both as being capable of running Godot
and being accessible hardware.
And so we don't currently have a way to target that directly,
but it is something that we're looking at,
because it would-- it makes a lot of sense,
like totally agree.
The only thing I can say on Android
is that I have a Chromebook that I
run the Android version of Godot on.
It runs fairly well for me.
So I haven't-- I don't have a lot of direct experience
for it when I want to check how a behavior is in an iPad or iOS
versus how it is on Android and how they're handling touch.
I fire it up pretty often.
It works pretty well for me.
Godot Con in Boston, we had the metagies
they were speaking about Android adoption,
and it's pretty wide and pretty popular.
And people-- again, sort of the message I had from earlier,
like that is the computing device that they have.
And they use it for that.
So, yeah.
Is there another question?
Ah, yeah.
This is really amazing.
I did the iOS game with Godot.
And it's a huge hassle to get at working.
And even from a Windows, testing out iOS games is amazing.
This is also work with C#, or maybe knowing Miguel.
It works with Swift.
Yeah.
So both are possible.
I think it's more likely that we would do Swift earlier.
But realistically, GDScript is very popular.
And it's pretty useful for iterating quickly.
So we're going to be pretty focused on that for a while.
C# would bring a lot of dependencies in, unfortunately.
So I can see where in this world where you're developing
from Godot, and maybe Godot, and Visual Studio,
it might make a lot more sense.
So I was like, I wouldn't say it's off the table.
It's totally doable, as is Swift.
But right now, we just want to be pretty focused on delivering
a great experience for what we currently support.
With that, the time is up.
So please give another round of applause.
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
