API URL: https://media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93495
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/godotfest2025-unlocking-godots-superpower-productivity
Title: Unlocking Godot’s Superpower: Productivity

[MUSIC PLAYING]
So if you happen to be a game developer from Munich,
you probably remember Mimi Mimi games.
Luca Martinelli worked there with Unity,
like many studios.
But now he's working at Pippin Bites with Godot.
and and and and
and and and and and and and and and
and and and and and and and and and and
so today we'll talk about productivity.
I'll get into it to a second.
It will start a bit theoretical, abstract,
but I will get very concrete and I'll get into our details.
A bit about myself.
Somebody on the website said,
I'm a productivity and workflow expert.
I have no clue what that means,
but it's the perfect LinkedIn bio.
So I'll use that from now on.
In reality, I'm a game designer and a developer.
I consider myself a programmer.
I consider myself a designer.
And I try to be a generalist, but it's hard.
Until 2023, I was working at Mimi Mimi here in Munich.
It's actually just a few minutes from here.
Very nostalgic.
And we worked on a nice game called Shadow Gambit.
But as we heard, it wasn't Unity.
[LAUGH]
This is where you can boo.
Then when the company shut down,
it was around the time where Unity had some issues.
And like everybody else, I turned to the prettier girl
[LAUGH]
and tried to chase it.
Afterwards, there was this great opportunity
to join Bip and Bits and get to work on DomeKeeper,
post launch on all the new content that we added.
And this really gave me the opportunity
to transfer to Godot, a new engine,
straight into a release product, a production ready product,
which never had these foundational concepts
from Unity and use Godot in a different way,
a way I wasn't used to.
And by now, I get to work on PBKK,
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
which is a great opportunity to further my knowledge in Godot.
Yeah.
All right.
So what does this talk about?
I'm gonna talk about productivity.
This is gonna be the high level design stuff.
And I'm gonna move it forward, start getting more technical
and talk about how it works in Godot,
how it interacts with Godot,
why productivity works well in Godot.
And finally, I'm gonna talk about how we use it
at Bip and Bits and kind of our strategies
to take this even further with very, very concrete examples.
I'm gonna air all of our dirty laundry
'cause that's what you should do.
So to reiterate, I'm gonna talk about
what makes productivity so important,
why Godot is so good at it
and how we as a company try to push it even further.
Let's talk about productivity.
So the formal definition is the rate
at which a company or country makes goods.
It's a very formal thing comes from,
yeah, from the industry and it has this beautiful equation.
Productivity is just the rate of your output
over your input.
If we rearrange it, it becomes a little bit more intuitive.
It's a measure of speed.
It's a multiplier, a scalar on your input.
So what is input?
Well, in the game development context,
it can be anything, it's time, it's people,
it's how many hours your employees work,
what kind of resources you have.
But the one I really wanna talk about
is productivity only over time.
About an individual developer,
an individual programmer, designer,
an individual little person working in engine.
And if you look at this equation,
some of you will recognize that this is just the equation
for speed.
So speed distance is speed over time or speed times time.
And this is what we're talking about.
So productivity is just the speed
at which you create an output.
To put it into a context, like a game's lens,
we can take this example and consider
the game development process as kind of trying
to climb a hill.
You start with nothing or something
and you're trying to make a better game.
And in this analogy, making a better game
is reaching the top.
Productivity would be your movement speed,
just how fast are you moving?
Now, until now, we're talking about general productivity,
just speed, just how fast do you do things,
how fast does the engine work,
what kind of environments, like, yeah, just speed.
But the one that we really care about
is what I like to call a key productivity,
which is not the general speed,
but kind of the speed at which you make a game better.
So this is a big difference.
There's a giant difference between just being fast
and being fast at making a game better.
In the current situation, we'll know
it's important to make good games.
Only a small percentage of games actually make it.
The amount of games that get released increases.
So the pressure on making a good game has increased.
Making a mediocre game, average game,
just doesn't work out anymore.
If we go back to our analogy,
normal productivity is just how fast you walk.
And the key productivity making the game better
is kind of how fast you walk towards your destination.
It's kind of relative to the point you're going to
in games that's unclear what it is in this analogy.
It's getting up, reaching the peak.
And so they can be very different.
For example, there was a time
when I started getting good at system development,
and I started to gain speed.
I started over-engineering, and I had so much speed,
I made everything super complex.
I took systems, and then I made simulations,
and I added more layers and layers and layers.
And the reality is that I was faster,
so normal productivity was up.
But this key productivity was down
'cause the games were worse.
The games just weren't playable, they weren't fun.
So I was walking, I was moving faster.
I was just moving in the wrong direction very often.
So how do we make games better, faster?
That's kind of the key question for every developer.
Yeah.
So there's some kind of naive interpretation
or emotional responses that often happen.
One is just by making better predictions.
You work on a system, it takes you three, four iterations,
and at the end you say, how could I've made this faster?
How could I've made this better more quickly?
And you go, well, if I was better,
if I made better prediction,
I would've gotten this on the first iteration.
I would've gone straight away.
And the reality is that, yeah, maybe through experience,
you can develop better instincts,
get better at making predictions.
But the reality is that this is not actionable,
this is not how you should think
about this kind of process,
it's not how you gain speed,
because it's not something you can change quickly,
this is something you need to build up over a long time.
The other one is making less mistakes,
it's the same thing, you build a system,
then months later you get a bug,
you spend three days fixing that bug,
and you think, how could I've done this better?
Just don't write that bug.
It's the same thing, yeah, long term with experience with time,
you get better at this,
it's really about understanding the space.
If you've made a game in the genre before,
or in the space before,
you're less likely to repeat this,
but it's not actionable,
this is not the kind of thing you should work on.
If you're in that position,
you're spending a whole day fixing a bug,
the solution was not to not have the bug that won't happen.
So the one I wanna talk about
is by getting faster in general.
It was a little bit weird,
'cause I just said, going fast and making games fast
is not the same, actually can even lead you the wrong way.
And this is kind of the key of my talk,
and what I really wanna talk about.
I think by just getting better at going fast in general,
how you work, how you use your tools, just the micro,
you're just gonna make better games,
you're gonna get better at making better games in general.
All right, so to talk about this,
I need to talk about the Flash.
So the Flash has the super power,
his super power is just to be fast,
it's perfect in our analogy.
But if you think about the Flash,
and you think about what he actually does,
he has a set of other superpowers that come from being fast
that are actually more important than him being fast.
For example, he can run up walls,
this is just a consequence.
There's some others where he just shakes his hands
and creates tornadoes out of his arms,
and the one that most of us know is that he can time travel.
So his power is speed,
but the consequence of it is he can time travel,
and that's the way more exciting super power.
So I have kind of five hidden superpowers
of tapping into the speed force
that come from just getting faster.
The first one is that you get resilient
against the Sunkos' fallacy.
Does everybody know what the Sunkos' fallacy is?
Yeah, raise your hands, if you will.
All right, there's a definition here,
but the thing we care about is that Sunkos comes
from an investment of money, time, and effort.
It is not a metric of time.
Oh, sorry, it is a metric of time.
And what this means is that if you are being faster,
kind of the pressure, the impact of the Sunkos' fallacy
is reduced.
So in a way, you build the form of resistance.
You're less likely, you're less prone to fall for it,
and this means you're gonna take less bad decisions
that are driven by the Sunkos' fallacy.
You know, often we call this kill your darlings,
and so being fast makes you better at killing your darlings.
Being fast allows you to make mistakes.
Taking, like, taking, exploring the space you're in,
design-wise, it's a lot about the cost
of doing this exploration.
If the cost, like, the pressure of making a mistake
becomes unbearable or too high,
you feel forced into getting things right the first time.
You feel forced into not exploring
and kind of exploiting the things you already know.
And this is very counterproductive
in a kind of discipline that's very dynamic,
where it's really about, you will make mistakes.
So it's really about kind of accepting the fact
that you will make mistakes working from them
and also using the fact that you make mistakes
to understand the space you're in better.
So you make, yeah, you can make mistakes,
which is very positive thanks to speed.
The third one, I mean, this is the obvious one.
We don't really talk about it.
If you're faster, you can do more iterations.
If you've seen a video talk yesterday,
you know the importance of iteration speed,
being the key of kind of development nowadays.
And yeah, being fast, more iterations,
more iterations in a very concrete way
and kind of agile development leads to better result.
You just end up iterating,
end up trying different things, make mistakes,
shifting your priority.
And so just by being fast,
you have the time to make more iterations
and this will lead to better game design
without needing to be a better game designer.
This is a bit of a controversial one,
but one of the more important one,
being fast makes you more experienced faster.
So it goes back to the equation,
where does experience come from?
My experience in the definition is a result of effort
and work.
It is not a unit of time.
So you're not experienced
because you did something for 10 years
in the sense that 10 years have passed,
your experience because in those 10 years,
you've done something very often a lot repetitively.
It goes back to exploration.
You got the opportunity to explore space.
So when you can come back with a problem
that is in the same space,
you have witnessed it before,
you've kind of felt it before.
And by being faster, you end up doing more things,
which in the same regard allow you to explore more,
lead you to be more experienced
and this goes back to the points I said before
about making better predictions,
making less mistakes in general.
So suddenly being fast does approach those two solutions
in a very positive way.
The last one, and maybe the most important one,
being fast is just more fun.
And this is not to be underestimated
because kind of velocity productivity moving
in game development is one of the most important aspects.
You want to feel good, you want to,
yeah, when I get in a state of flow,
continue kind of your positive development cycle.
It creates a positive feedback loop.
And so this is scientifically proven.
Short reward cycles increase short-term enjoyment,
kind of just shortening the time
between you start something
and you get positive feedback for it,
or negative feedback, if you're good at the link with it,
just makes the experience more exciting, more positive.
It makes, yeah, more enjoyable.
Right, let me, okay, yeah.
Right, so quick summary of productivity.
It's the speed at which you create an output
in the context of time.
The key productivity thing we should really care about
is the speed at which we make games better.
These don't align, they're not the same thing,
but being faster because of these hidden powers
that come with it is actually one way
to increase the important productivity,
this key productivity.
So let's get into Godot.
And why I'm holding this talk.
So after I moved away from Unity,
and I meet my old colleagues and people I knew
from the Unity scene, they always ask me,
how's it going in Godot?
Do you like it?
How is it?
And my answer is always, I love it,
because it's so fast.
And it makes me so productive that even though
I'm in a language that I'm not used to,
I worked in C# six, seven years before now working
in GDScript.
I'm faster in GDScript than I was in C#
very, very quickly.
For example, the first game jam we made was my first day
of work, I've only written a week of GDScript,
and I was at least as fast as after five or six years
of C#, and this is a big power.
So how do we make games better, faster?
By getting faster in general,
and the one I want to talk about for Godot
is by just reducing time wasted by the tools
and the engine.
So let's break it down, let's get a little bit concrete.
What does the normal feature development look like?
Well, you make the feature, you ship it, all right?
But doesn't mean, well, you have a concept,
then you make an MVP, and then you do some iterations,
and then you ship it, okay.
You make a concept, an MVP, an iteration,
a second iteration, a third iteration,
fourth iteration, you make a build, you send it to QA,
they test it, get it back to you,
you fix the 700 bucks, you just add it,
and you ship it.
So it's getting very minute,
and we're gonna come to why the engine is important.
If we look at one iteration, which realistically
is the biggest part of our time,
the kind of the most important part of our time,
and also the part where we do our work,
we do the things we're good at.
And we break it down further, well, it gets interesting.
So, okay, you do the planning for iteration,
you boot up the project, people always forget the step,
it's a big step, you make some changes,
this is where you actually write code or make assets,
this is your job, then you compile,
if you see that, you know where I'm going with this,
you run the project, you test it,
you find some bugs, so you bug fix, you compile again,
you test it again, and you run the project,
you test it again, all right.
Now you realize you're not done,
because that's not how we work,
we don't implement a whole feature in one shot,
you need to do a pass on it, in an iteration,
you do many iterations.
So you make some changes, you compile,
you run the project, you test it, you bug fix,
then you compile, run the test,
and test it to test the fix of the bug fix,
and you do it again, and until we get to the part
that's interesting, then you make a build,
send it to QA in the kind of cycle we work in,
finally do some kind of higher level testing
with your team, with external players, whatever.
So if we look at this, which is what our day actually looks like,
and I call or code it, there's a bit of a pattern,
so the green things is what I call kind of scale basis,
this is our job, the red things,
well the red things is just the engine
and the framework you're in, this is most of the time
has nothing to do with you and everything to do
with how you're working, and the blue things,
well are kind of a bit of both, testing is about,
obviously how quick you are at testing,
but it's also about how well you can test in the engine,
how many you have tools to kind of prepare this,
how much time is just wasted doing nothing.
The metaphor I like to say is that everything that's red,
and which is also half of the blue,
is a cool down between your actual job
and the next time you get to your job.
So you can be an amazing programmer, artist, designer,
whatever, if you're working in an engine,
and be really, really good at this OP scale,
and then just go and cool down
for the next kind of 50% of your work.
And if you take this, compress it back
to the slide from before, and look at this
from the large side, yeah, it's really,
obviously this is not proportional,
I didn't get to measure it, which I wanna do,
and compare the engines, but this is for the next time,
you actually don't work a lot when you work.
Yeah, I mean, it's a lot of it.
And what this means is that the engine
and tools the environment you're in matter for speed
as much as your skill.
And now we finally get to talk about Kado,
'cause there's some nodes in there
that maybe you wouldn't consider for Kado.
So this is kind of the industry standard,
this is the Unity Unreal,
and this is, in part, Kado with C#.
And then we look at Kado with G script.
So what is happening?
Well, our boot time is down, and that looks minor,
but I have a nice story for this.
I went to visit a friend of years ago
who worked in a big AAA Unreal project,
and he will start his day by waking up,
going to his computer, pulling from the repository we're in,
clicking play, and then going to a breakfast for an hour,
because it took an hour to get into playtime
the first time they run.
And this is a common thing.
This is not like a one-off.
This is what game development looks like
on the higher levels.
In Kado, in PBKK, I don't know, five seconds,
10 seconds, I don't know, because it's so short.
The second time that is gone,
which is the most important one,
there's no compile time.
You make your changes, you're done.
This is the most frequent cooldown in Unity.
When I was at Mimimi on ShadowGambit,
or kind of compile, well, it's not compile,
but whatever domain reload,
whatever you want to call it in C#,
was about 45 seconds.
And we spent a lot of time getting it down to 45 seconds.
It was like, I don't know, 500,000,
300,000 lines of code code base.
It has a lot of things happening.
And most of the time, as a programmer,
or as a designer, the changes you make are minimal.
You change two lines of code.
It's like 17 seconds of work,
followed by a minute and a half cooldown on your skill.
And the third one, equally important, the runtime.
How long are you after the compilation?
You click play, what's your wait time here?
And this can easily be minutes in larger projects.
But in Kado, it tends to be extreme, extremely fast.
And I'll talk back about this
when we talk about PBKK and our projects.
Another thing you might notice is that,
actually, let me look at time, all right.
Another thing you might notice is that
there's a whole iteration chunk missing
after the first pass.
So when I showed it earlier,
you would run your first text, a test, find bugs,
stop playing, fix the bugs, recompile, rerun tests.
But with GDScript and the amazing implementation
of hot reload, you actually don't do this.
You test the first time, find the bug,
open the code, fix the bug, you're still in game,
you get to test that the bug fix works,
this is 90% of the bugs, and you just keep going.
So you're skipping this doubling of the compilation
and running time by just using this amazing feature
that's the core of the engine.
So if you look at it, well, that's a very good improvement.
And the amount of time I'm actually working
has gone up significantly.
And so this goes to the name of the talk,
the superpower of Godot as I like to call,
or that I just came up with, Godot was Triforce,
having a primary language with no compilation time.
I'm interested here.
How many here use Godot with C#?
Yeah, that's 20%, okay, that's less than I expected.
And the rest is all GDScript.
Can I get a raise hands for GDScript?
Oh, I love it.
I don't even need to hold a talk.
I specify primary programming language
because you have scenarios like Unreal
with, I immediately forgot what the feature is called,
the node-based scripting.
Blueprints, thank you, which is an amazing,
amazing way to program.
But there is a massive difference between a system
that's built to support versus a system.
Obviously, yeah, Godot's main language is C++,
but the user language is GDScript,
and it's gonna continue to be the way that everything
that is ported to kind of user land, to developer land,
will be supported in GDScript.
And this means kind of contrary to blueprints
that you're not forced to sometimes go,
I now need an expert C++ programmer.
There are some reasons to do it,
and it's always great to have that possibility.
But the fact that it's the core and it's still text-based
is a very, very significant difference.
The second one I've talked about it,
this is it, this is Godot.
Seamless and instant hot reload takes away
a third of your cooldown.
It's the greatest upgrade you can buy.
And the last one, again, fast launch, play,
and export times.
On PBKK right now, our build pipeline,
which includes automatic testing and upload to Steam,
it's about 30 minutes.
It's not amazing, but that's like, okay,
take a launch break.
And maybe me, it was eight hours.
So the only way to get a build was to wait
for the build for the next day.
And actually without the build pipeline,
if you run it locally and you have the cache
already prepared and everything,
this can be like a minute.
And it happens more often than you think,
that you just need to make a build, do bug fixing,
make a build, do bug fixing,
or QA has some requirements.
And bringing that iteration time down as well
is as important as the other two.
All right, the Mythical 10x developer in context.
Does somebody not know what the 10x developer is?
All right, I'll explain it.
So by now it's a bit of a meme.
It comes from computer science production,
kind of managing large developer teams.
And it's this idea that kind of the bell curve
of how fast developers are is a real thing.
And there's the normal developers 100% one times the speed.
And there's some mystical 10x developer
that in the same time does 10 times the work.
It's become a meme because it's a very unrealistic thing,
that kind of big tech and Fortune 500 companies
kind of use as catchphrases and kind of things to look for,
or to justify, like to use as an AI thing.
But it's still useful as a reference.
So if we take the original thing in a generic engine
and we apply a 10x, we put a 10x developer in it,
this is what it looks like.
Obviously, yeah, proportionally, it's not correct.
But yeah, this is not 10x.
And what it means practically is that the better your
developers, the kind of the faster the closer they are
to this absurd number, the more the slowdown
from your framework or your tools is gonna impact
your general productivity.
You take a 10x developer, these people
are probably worth millions, at least in Silicon Valley,
these people are worth millions.
And you put it in the framework and he's just
on cooldown the whole time.
So, reducing, yeah, time wasted by tools in an engine
matters more the better you get.
And this is something that professional developers know
where they get really good at an engine
and get more and more frustrated with kind of the overhead
that takes away from their core productivity.
So, yeah, look at this, if you are set up using C#
or in general, we're not using hot reload the way
you really can.
And think about, yeah, you've fired some amazing people
and now you've just put them on cooldown.
How am I doing that time?
Okay.
The what is the engine doing time?
This is another kind of super powerful, though.
A lot of concepts in game engines, because they do so much
from so many kind of departments, mathematics, physics,
simulation, everything, is that engines are really complex,
they're very difficult.
But the reality is that most of the code in an engine
is kind of boilerplate, it's about connections,
it's about graph, like dependencies and everything.
And they're really hard systems like rendering, et cetera.
They're very important, but there's a lot about the engines
that you can learn very quickly.
So, I have this example.
Let's say a scenario, you call this function
and there's only one node in your whole tree
that is in the group that you're looking for.
Who thinks this function is very slow?
Can I get a raise of hands?
All right.
Who thinks it's very fast?
Who thinks it's faster than having a reference
in another class and you just go something
like world.get handler?
Yeah.
(laughs)
And the reality is because we're in Godot and it's open source,
yeah, step one, you look at the documentation,
but actually it says nothing about speed.
And the ones of you that come from Unity,
they might know that kind of infamous function
called get find game object with tag,
which used to be, or maybe still is,
one of the slowest function you could kind of use
'cause it would have to crawl everything,
it would do a disaster.
And so, the first thing you would learn in Unity,
never use it.
And then you come to Godot and you go, never use it.
And the documentation doesn't tell you,
it doesn't say anything about it, which is fine
'cause it's talking about what it does,
not how it does it.
And the reality is you can just, you know,
have Visual Studio or whatever, open up the source code.
If you can read C++, you don't need to be able to write it.
If you write C# or have experience with similar languages,
you can read the source code to a point
that you understand what it's doing.
And all you have to do is just kind of take the function name
you use in GDScript, search with quotation marks
and you're gonna find the binding
so you can just look at the function.
And if you actually look at how it's implemented in Godot,
well, it uses a hash mark.
Everything is cached when you add it to groups.
So there's no searching involved.
It might be a bit of a misnomer 'cause,
oh no, actually, yeah, it's called get first node and group.
So it kind of implies that it's fast.
This is kind of a programming principle
to maybe name functions that tend
to do more complex operations, something like find,
which is why in Unity, you know,
it was fine game object attack,
but here it's get first node and group.
But this is a big difference.
This means that this function is very fast,
as long as there's only one node in it,
because the moment a lot of nodes are in a group,
they get sorted again.
So suddenly the time is very dependent on how you use it.
And this is the kind of thing that you can't do in Unity at all.
And this costs a lot.
And Unreal has a, you can do it in Unreal,
but it has a very, very logical base
that is very interconnected.
You need to understand a lot of concepts.
And I found in my experience that just doing this in Godot,
you can understand what a function is doing
by just spending 20 seconds and reading
at the first kind of five to 10 lines of code.
And this is really important because the amount of time
when making a game, especially when you get closer to release,
that you get these problems that are just about
not knowing what's happening under the hood,
is actually surprisingly high.
All right.
So this was a point about Godot.
We wanna look faster, we wanna make better games.
Going fast in general helps with that.
And the way, you know, in regards to tool,
a really good way to do it, reduce time wasted
on the framework on the tools you're using.
And Godot is really, really good at it.
The other way to kind of make games better faster,
which is an obvious statement,
is just reduce the time you're not making the game faster.
Yeah.
But what it means is that there's a lot of things
that you can do very quickly that actually have no impact
on the game getting better.
And if you think about back to productivity in the industry,
is how do you increase production speed
while you sacrifice quality?
And this is something that we often watch negatively,
kind of in that regard.
But in terms of games, there's a lot of things you're doing
that are not making the game better.
They're not for the game.
They are for other reasons.
You write code architecture for a coding standpoint.
You make sure that all of your edges on a drawing
are really clean and smooth from an artistic standpoint.
From a design point, you try to find
the best possible answer.
And the reality is that there's a lot of shortcuts,
trade-offs, and sacrifices you can take
to really kind of feed the big part,
the most important part, which is just make the game better
by taking away kind of your pride
and the love for your job
and pushing it into making the game better.
And this is really hard because as a programmer, for example,
you go to a conference or something like that,
and you really want to show good code.
You want to show clean code.
That's what it means to be a good programmer.
And the reality is that as a game developer,
actually should do the opposite.
They should go to a conference and just be,
look at how bad this code is.
I wrote it in one second.
That's the magic.
So let's go to Bip-A-Bits talking about that.
And I'm going to talk very concretely
about what we do in PVP game.
So Bip-A-Bits and Godot is very exciting
because the core Bip-A-Bits team,
when they kind of did this move or went there,
they didn't come from the Unreal Unity background.
They didn't have all of these learnings
that come from how those engines work.
So they kind of, and came from much smaller,
kind of more old-school simplistic engines
that didn't come with this kind of burden of knowledge
and techniques that you have in those two.
And what it means is that they do things very differently
than I used to do in Unity and without kind of the bias
of those learnings.
So I'm going to go through a few.
These first few are not features or things we build.
It's just how we use the engine.
The first thing is we do is we just load assets
by path in the script, in the middle.
We just drag, hold, control, drop, done.
There's other ways to do it.
You can use UUIDs, don't.
And you can make an export and then go into the inspector
and play Unity for a bit and just take the thing
and drop it in.
And from a programming standpoint, that more stable.
It creates like independence.
And one of the things it does, which happens in bigger companies,
is if your level designer comes in
and likes to rename the object because that would make sense
and they're not aware about how you build,
well, this just breaks the game.
And so doing the interaction makes sense in those big engines,
maybe.
But it's slow, and this is fast.
So the advantage, it's incredibly fast.
It's incredibly easy to read and debug,
and this is why you shouldn't use UUIDs.
Because we read this, we know what we're doing.
You can control click into it.
Yeah, you can do it on UUIDs.
But the code tells me everything I need
to know about what this execution is doing.
If I do it in direction with export,
actually, the variable might not be assigned.
So I read the code, it looks perfect, it doesn't run.
There's a missing reference.
Or you might have dropped in something wrong.
Like, it creates this interaction
where you have to go back to the engine, look at the node,
look if the reference is correct.
You're spending a lot of time for something
that could just be there.
It's a very old-school way of writing, making games.
But I think it's the correct way.
It's the fast way, in Godot, for the games that we make.
Obviously, we make certain kinds of game.
Yeah, everything you know is in code.
Do not underestimate the importance of that statement.
When the programmer and the designer are the same people,
or the designer is capable of reading code to the good degree,
it makes understanding your code base,
even on larger code bases, exponentially faster
and easier than the other case.
So the trade-off, this might feel dirty.
And now I have to talk about the feeling of feeling dirty.
I'm going to show you these dirty things.
And you can think, OK, this is bad programming.
And you're right, that's the point.
But I really want to think about the thing I'm talking about.
The core, which is the only thing that matters,
is making the thing you have, and making it better,
and getting faster at doing that.
So making better code, or writing good code,
this feeling of dirtiness from doing something bad,
because this is bad.
It's not justified from that perspective.
It comes from this higher-level understanding
of programming that comes from a software development
where you have 500 people making software that's
supposed to run for 40 years, or run our banks,
run our satellites.
But we're making games.
We're making broken products.
So what's the trade-off?
So what's the actual cost?
Talking about dirtiness.
What does it actually cost to do this ugly thing?
Well, yeah, renaming, moving assets breaks the game.
And renaming, moving assets is slower.
But if you look at the percentage,
you use this part more than you rename stuff.
And it's not that much slower.
That part is making.
And all you have to do is create the shared understanding
that renaming or moving things might impact code execution.
Just go through the three steps.
From every time you want to rename something,
do right-click, see where it's owned,
see the references, maybe searching code,
if something like this is happening.
It's a bit slower.
But you need to trust your designers
and kind of non-technical people that are reading code
to understand such a simple pipeline as don't just
rename instinctively.
And GDScript is pretty good at immediately screaming at you
when you do something like this in a bad way.
So it's not a high price for something very, very fast.
Yeah, we reference node in scenes by unique names.
It's the same principle.
Just move to the in-scene structure.
So here you have three choices.
You can reference with the dollar sign.
I don't know what that's called.
You can use the unique names.
Or you can make an export variable, drag and thing, drop it in.
And this is really, really fast.
It has the same weakness.
If you rename it breaks.
But it has this advantage that every time
you see something in the scene tree that has a percent sign,
you know you shouldn't rename it.
And you can move it.
So it's a different weakness.
Yeah, it's superior to just the dollar sign.
And it's incredibly fast.
So very fast, drag and drop.
Resilience to change hierarchy, which is great.
And you immediately know where to find a reference.
And this is not to be underestimated,
because the interaction that brings kind of code stability
costs a lot of time.
Trade off same thing, renaming can break.
It's slower.
You just need the shared understanding.
Let me get faster.
Yeah, we really use hot reload.
I've already talked about this before.
But very often when programming, you find--
you get programming challenges.
Is this a times one or a times minus one scenario?
Do I have to offset-- is this offset by one kind of bug?
Or what equation will feel good when I play this?
And yeah, there's some-- if you're really good at programming,
maybe you know, though, like you can just solve that.
But it goes back to the fact that getting really good at that
means takes time, takes experience.
The other thing you can do is just try, just write some code,
run it, use hot reload to just change dynamically.
If it's a pick up animation, just write whatever, run it,
and go in, just adjust it, tweak it.
And this happens very often.
And it's crazy how much faster this is than the classic method
of trying to understand the kind of interpret experience
through algorithms and kind of iterating on that.
The other thing you can do is obviously use it for assets
as well, just the classic problem is, you know,
does it look good when I'm in game?
And you just move it 50 times and just throw it in.
And just kind of change it while you're playing.
Now we get a little bit more technical.
We bundle the engine with the project.
This is a very dirty thing.
But in our Git repository, the version of the engine
we're using is in there.
How many people are doing this in their projects?
Ah, nice.
So what does it mean is that the engine
comes with the project, and it has
a lot of positive side effects.
Very easy to set up and run.
You can seamlessly change the engine version
without telling anybody in most of the engine upgrades,
which you should do.
And for anybody who has done this kind of in other engines
or in Godot as well, this can be a very annoying process.
You have to kind of go on Discord and tell everybody, hey,
the next time you kind of-- if you pull,
you need to go to this link, download this version of the game,
and then run it.
And also, you can seamlessly change to a custom engine
or a custom version.
You need a debug version of the build,
because you have certain bugs that don't show up.
You just hot swap this version.
No more word version, Ariane.
No more please upgrade.
And it creates seamless cooperation with freelancers.
You don't have this thing anymore.
The first thing, if freelancer comes in, you have to go--
you have to find this specific version of Godot.
It's actually, on the website, you
need to go other versions, find that link, whatever.
It's incredibly useful.
And the other thing it's useful for is,
if you have a build pipeline, you
don't need to kind of manage two repositories
or whatever version tracking.
Just the build pipeline has the build there.
Everything you need to create a package
is right there with you.
The trade off, $5.
For the whole company, yeah.
The Bip and Biz runs on $5 Alt-S cost to support that.
So let's get to the last part of my talk,
which is kind of the more layering on top.
That was how we use Godot.
And this is how do we kind of advance Godot.
This is the most important one per project start option.
So both for Don't Keep or MPVKK, we
don't use the normal play button.
We have this extension to the editor
where we just kind of pick where you want to start.
In Dome, actually, I don't know if cool between Chris
and Austin did it.
They actually also support a multiplayer.
So suddenly, you want to test something.
You skip the first 30 to 40 seconds of your test session
where you boot the normal game, and then you go into the loadout,
and you pick which keeper you want to do.
And then you load the game by just kind of clicking
these drop downs.
And in PVKK, for example, we have a lot of missions,
and often the thing you want to test
is just that a specific mission.
And you can just jump to it.
And in the future, we might do things like certain bugs only
happen if you bought certain upgrades, certain specific things.
Well, we can prepare save files or kind of cheat code for it,
and then just add an option, what kind of upgrades
that you want to have, like nothing, random selection,
things like that.
And then suddenly, it really speeds up
that kind of testing iteration loop.
How many of you are doing something like this in your game?
All right, good.
Good.
Yeah, YAML.
This is another thing we do, and this, again,
goes back to the kind of the Unity 2.0 thing.
When I see Unity developers try good over the first time,
they try to put all of their data in Engine,
because that's kind of how you use those engines.
They try to create these concept kind of structures
like nested resources references.
And Godot isn't good at that yet.
But also, it's just not the best way to do it.
So another thing we do is we just go very old school
and take some of these responses away from the Engine
and move it to something that we have more direct design
control over.
In PVKK, what we do, this is our mission definition.
And what it means is that if you want
to make a new mission for the game,
you just kind of take a block, add these properties.
And actually, the entirety of the level design
is those four lines and spawn plan.
That's the level.
And we do some special things.
For example, those lines there, like this Lander M 10.0
minus 1,000, well, that supports kind of dynamic properties
and we can customize it.
So this is saying I'm spawning a ship of type Lander.
This is a class, like a node somewhere a scene, I don't know.
After 10 seconds at position minus 1,600.
And we can dynamically add some properties,
like that ID is equal to target.
And what this allows us to do is kind of completely speed up
this design development pipeline by just taking ownership
of this part of the game, moving it to something
we have full control over, and then parsing it in Godot
and kind of stepping over the Engine
and saying Godot, you're great, but you're not great at this.
And we can make it tailor-made for us.
And this is another example.
We use this system everywhere.
The shop, every item in the shop is also
kind of defined in this kind of structure.
It's a very normal thing to do.
But we can see that we can customize the data
and kind of specify the way we want to use it.
Later on it was, I think I will skip this one for time
reasons, but well, actually, maybe it's very important.
So this goes to a very big problem in programming.
One of the most important thing you do, which is kind of--
this dependency change of how is your data,
how is your execution flowing from one point to another.
And games can be very interconnected in a way
that we don't like a software engineer.
So you want your gameplay code to trigger an UI execution.
And then you want to wait for the UI
and then trigger the gameplay code again.
This is hate from a software engineer.
You don't want this.
But game design-wise, you should do this more often,
because often it feels good that the game is more reactive,
more responsive.
So you have to write that kind of code.
And the way we write that kind of code
is we have this data event bus, which
create kind of indirect dependencies.
And here is how it works.
This is the full implementation of our subtitle system.
In gameplay, I just say, hey, I want
to change the UI subtitle to this line of text.
And the subtitle system just says, yeah, OK, label.text
is equal to text, end of implementation.
So I'm skipping the entirety dependency chain of how
would I get that ROAs?
Well, the radio system, if we go full software architecture,
we need either some kind of service provider.
We need to find a way.
Or the dependency should be injected.
So I have a reference to an AI subtitle display
or an AI kind of UI feedback or whatever you want to call it.
And I need to solve that whole kind of architecture graph
and go all the way down.
Or you just do this stupid thing.
And it's string-based.
It's slow, like performance-wise, this is very slow.
The multiplayer guys might know something about it.
And you could make it faster, but it's really fast to implement.
And I will give somebody--
maybe I won't do that.
But the amount of times your CPU bottlenecked in modern games,
you need to do a very specific subset of games
to be CPU bottlenecked, maybe something
with a lot of entities doing very complex things.
But most kind of normal casual games,
they don't even get close.
Even with GDScript, they're 20 times slower than writing it
in C++ or something like that.
With some insane costs, you never even get close to it.
So this kind of cost doesn't matter.
Yeah, necessary factorial reference.
This is kind of the same problems
face of having to sort your dependency chains.
Yeah, and the top left one is if you've played factorial,
that's clearly the way to do it.
But sometimes just a little bit of chaos
doesn't actually impact the high-level kind of side effects.
And it's just a million times easier to write for moments.
We have a build pipeline.
Who here has an automated build pipeline?
Yeah.
We wrote it very quickly.
It runs fully on GitHub.
It just kind of clones the repo, makes a build,
runs automatic tests, makes an automatic steam upload.
And it also does this nice thing that it just tags kind
of what build on Steam is which version.
And I have this line down here.
Because back when I started joined DomeKeeper,
we had this dynamic where the only person that knew
how to make builds and made builds was Renee,
CEO lead designer.
And he was managing a company, being the lead designer,
fixing bugs, doing everything.
And then periodically QA would have to be like, hey, Renee,
can you stop everything you're doing to make me this build?
Which he'd do by hand, use kind of the Steam API
to upload it manually.
And then if you're fixing bugs, QA would be, was this fixed?
And you go, I don't know.
I don't know when Renee made this build.
Maybe he made it at 11 in the morning?
I don't know.
And by doing this kind of steps--
and it's easy to set up pipelines right now.
I mean, JetBrains talk yesterday about they
have their own CI/CD stuff.
You can use it native.
There's a lot of tools for this.
This is not the problem it used to be.
Yeah, and for us, this has saved us
an infinite amount of time.
If you have a big enough company,
don't do this if you're one guy.
Don't go like, I'm going to make a beautiful build plug.
And this is about saving time in the long run as a developer.
I don't want to ever have to do a build.
You know, I want to write code.
I want to do this stuff I'm good at.
I don't want to be the person that's like, oh, yeah,
let me go press export.
And then you-- yeah, another thing that happens, obviously,
is reliability.
If it's running with the same architecture,
same execution every time, they're consistent.
This is very useful.
If you're making builds on your machine,
oh, did you forget a change?
Did you not revert everything?
Is there some bad cache that you're
carrying from seven versions ago that suddenly makes
his way into your build, and it breaks some kind of data?
These things happen.
We have an in-game background reporter.
What it does is you can just write something in the game,
click a button, and it uploads it to Jira,
and it adds a save file.
It adds a save file.
It adds the logs.
It takes a screenshot.
Yeah, this is everything.
The amount of time QA spends chasing down reasons for bugs,
writing people like, hey, but in which version were you,
what's your platform?
This is really easy.
People love it.
They feel like they're part of the development.
It has a positive player experience.
And it's just really, really useful to save me time,
so that I don't have to do this shit.
And the last one, but not least, is I've made an audio
debugger, and what it does is kind of just tells you
what you're hearing.
And this is a bigger problem than people think about.
Because the normal audio development pipeline
is you have your sound engineer, they want to play a sound.
Maybe they're not technical, maybe they're technical.
But often an engineer implements it.
And then you play the game, and you don't hear it.
And there's like 10 reasons why you don't hear it.
The programmer forgot to do it.
The online engineer forgot to do it.
They did it, but it's wrong.
They did it, but there's a bug.
They did it, but it's restarting every frame,
so it theoretically is playing, but it's kind of restarting.
And just by having something like this,
the audio engineer themselves, when
they get a ticket or a bug about sound problems,
they just use this.
They look, can I hear the saying I'm supposed to hear?
OK, it's there.
It's playing.
I just don't hear it.
OK, so maybe it's just tuned too far down.
Or you see it's not playing.
It's a tech bug.
So it allows you to kind of skip the whole very iterative,
complex problem of taking an engineer's time, who's
supposed to kind of build your game and have him spend kind
of this time tracing down why the sound wasn't working.
Last but not least, not an advertisement,
but it should be U-century.
They have Godot integration now.
Godot is really bad at crashes.
It's really bad at telling you why something crashes.
It doesn't say anything.
Century fixes that in most of the cases.
It's kind of a service, obviously, professional thing.
And it's made exactly to kind of track
sources of issues and kind of big software.
Another way we use it, which you should also do, actually--
how many people here are using Century?
OK.
How many people here know what Century is?
OK.
Yeah.
Obviously, it's not always the case.
This is a thing we haven't been doing for a long time.
And it's something that only becomes relevant
at a specific size.
But if you are at that size, or even if you just
need to release-- if you're going to release a game,
you want to know why it crashes.
You want to know how often it crashes.
Right now, this is the way to do it.
There's not a good alternative.
I'm over my time.
I'm going to say a last sentence.
The other way we use it, which is a little bit
of a hack, but that's kind of the whole thing of the talk,
is that we also send safe load failures,
or safe load issues, to the Century thing.
And this is a complex problem when
you release a game that has a long story, which
is any kind of bug in that system
is going to be completely experience breaking.
It can remove like 10 hours of gameplay.
I've had this personally when ShadowGum had released.
I spent three days after that.
I fixed the bug.
It was an hour.
It was a stupid bug, but it was just a complexity.
And then I spent two days manually fixing people's safe path,
because they lost 10 to 15 hours of progress
because of the one and of code.
And normally, you don't get this reported,
because sometimes the safe just continues.
It just doesn't realize it failed.
And then they're playing on a broken version of your game.
This is like the worst outcome.
You much rather than just can't play.
Because then a week later, they go,
the game is completely broken, but actually broke a week ago.
And you will never find the cause.
So we just kind of, when the safe load system fails,
we just send it to the sentry.
And then periodically, we can look at it.
And we just can find out why we're failing.
And we send the safe file.
We send where it failed.
All the data we needed.
Yeah, last but not least, now I'm
talking about speed and speed to make better games.
And now I've talked about tooth.
But this shouldn't be-- you shouldn't get out of this room
thinking, oh, now I'm going to build these tools.
It was really about productivity.
And I pretty much showed a lot of the tools we have.
I'm not showing you the top 10.
I'm kind of showing you like half of our tools.
Because a lot of the time, especially software developers,
we love building tools.
They're fun, they're cool, they're small.
And we overestimate how quickly we can write it.
And we overestimate what the return of investment.
You go like, yeah, we're going to use this every day
all the time.
And very often, it's not the case.
So my rule of the method rule is it should be 10 times.
You should think that you get 10 times the reward.
Because the reality is it's going to take you three times
more to write it anyways, because you don't plan iteration
time, you don't plan like the whole thing.
And it's going to be half as useful as you think, so yes.
All right, thank you very much.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
