API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93428
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/godotfest2025-one-does-not-simply-ship-web-games-with-godot-yet
Title: One Does Not Simply Ship Web Games with Godot (Yet)

Making games with plain HTML, JavaScript and CSS is certainly possible, but you might
miss some features of a full-blown game engine like Godot, so what's the current status of
using Godot for web games? Well, here's the right person to answer this question.
Luca Leonardi has worked on several games in the past, is working currently in web development
and released much games. So, yeah, he has an in-depth knowledge of what you can do and
what you can't. So, let's welcome Luca Leonardi.
I'm not using the microphone, so okay. Hello, everyone. Thank you for being here. My name
is Luca Leonardi, and today we're going to talk about web games. In particular, we're
going to see what are web games, why they are interesting, and how does Godot fit currently
in the web gaming environment.
Something about me.
I'm known as Luxel on the web.
I published a few games, both on mobile and web.
I have more than five years of Godot experience.
One of the most famous games I published is Zook Adventure.
It's a 2D platform game available for Android.
And, yeah, in general what I want to offer today is the point of view, not just from an
example, this is my beautiful team, mainly Spanish and Canadian colleagues.
So something real quickly about my company.
We are located in Canary Islands in Spain.
We have more than 10 years of experience and our main focus are HTML 5 games.
So we do serious game, educational games, and more recently we started publishing games
on a platform like Chrissy Game, Pokey, Playgamma, so our game are available for the public.
Those are some of the games we published, different platforms like, as I said, for example, Pokey
Chrissy Games, Cool Math Games which they focus on puzzle mathematical games or game distribution.
You can find those games available online and we will also share the slides at the end
of the presentation.
So what are web games, actually, also known as HTML 5 games?
The idea of web games is that they are games easily available, instant gaming.
They run on different platforms like, for example, desktop, mobile, but also on smart
devices, smart watches.
So the idea is that they are small insights easily available and don't require a download
so you can play directly from your browser.
They have a lot of potential in terms of both user acquisition, thanks to platforms like,
for example, Chrissy Games or Pokey that publish your game, and also monetization.
There are various ways to monetize your web games like interstitial ads rewarding ads.
I don't ask you to trust me, actually, about this, but I want to show some data that proves
what I'm talking about.
The current state of the market shows that HTML 5 games are growing, it's a growing market.
There is this compound annual growth rate of 3.1% every year and it keeps growing.
Some data, I'm going to go briefly on this slide because it's packed with a lot of information.
But as I said, it's a growing market and more and more devs show the data, ships to dev every
year.
And there are more and more new games shipped on web platforms.
Chrissy Games and Pokey are growing platforms that reach hundreds of millions of users and
there are interesting monetization options.
But I'm not a marketer, I'm just a developer, so if you're interested, I can show the slide
that you see them.
So the question is, can I use Godot for making web games?
It depends.
Why Godot is cool?
Godot is cool for many different reasons, it's amazing options and for different reasons,
which are, of course, permissive license, because it's open source, so it's going to
be free forever.
It allows export on multiple platforms, not just web, but also desktop mobile, you name
it, and for that reason, it also supports 3D, so it's a really powerful engine, general
purpose engine.
It's really good for fast prototyping and iterations with GDScript, which allows to make
fast prototypes, also, for example, for game jams, and, in my opinion, as an amazing usability,
that's why one of the reasons why I use it.
It's really great for doing UI in games, for example, also it has a really great integration
with Git, so also it makes working with other team members really easy.
Unfortunately, there are other more specialized engines regarding the web environment currently.
For example, specifically default construct.
I also show Unity, even though it suffered from some of the similar problems of Godot,
but data shows that Unity has used a lot for web games, also they recently started supporting
a web GPU, but currently, the market offers other more specialized options.
This doesn't want to be a comparison, I just want to offer my point of view and my company
point of view of why we use another engine, because in our company, for making web games,
we use construct three, and the reason is that mainly it comes down to two main factors,
which are build sides and loading times, which is something that construct three does very
well, usually web builds with construct goes down to five megabytes, which is perfect for
web games, construct is also offers good performances, and a strong stability across devices, which
is important when releasing a web games, which is meant to run on a different type of devices,
as we saw, and also offers great tools, integrations, for example, with Firebase or other tools,
which we use a lot in the company where I work, makes it a very strong option for web games.
So yeah, this is not what the presentation is about, it's not a fight between Godot
and other engines, it's just what I want to try to put a light on is what is currently
missing from Godot to put it on the same level of other more specialized engines.
I want to do this by seeing a real case scenario, a case study, which is Spaloon, a game I
published on our platform on crazy games, so today I would like to show you the process
of publishing this game on the platform, the pain I encountered, and some work around,
some fixes I found at the current state of the web exports.
Spaloon is simply a roguelike where you control a cannon and you shoot bubbles, the idea is
to reach the highest possible score, you can pick upgrades, and that's basically the core
loop of the game, it's a simple game, it's well suitable for a web platform.
So let's talk a bit about the development and the publishing of it.
It started from a game jam, the global game jam, and it's made with Godot 4.3.
We basically did almost all the game, it's not looping the video, can never mind.
We basically did all the game in two days, in one weekend, the core gameplay mechanics,
and then after the jam, I started contacting some publishers, I tried to contact Paul
Key, crazy games, starting from the major end, going to other publishers, and crazy games
showed some interest in the game, but they asked for some changes, this is not unusual,
that the publisher asked for changes to the game.
So there was this first interaction, iteration of back and forth between me and the publisher,
so for example one of the biggest changes they asked for was making the game landscape,
because initially the game was sold for a portrait view, for a mobile view, and they asked for
a landscape change because their main audience is on the desktop.
I also had to implement the publisher SDK, which is common also, to implement the SDK
of the publisher.
And there was this back and forth of feedbacks regarding the gameplay, especially some of
the feedbacks were focused on ads placement, so the type of ads used rewarding ads for monetization
purposes.
After this back and forth that lasted, I don't know, maybe one month or something of changes,
the game finally got approved, and they managed to publish the game on the platform.
So I would like to share some of the issues I encountered during this process, and some
of the workarounds I found at the current state of GoDOT.
So the first pain point, of course, was the build sites.
As I said, it's really important for web games to have a small build site, because they have
to be fast accessible and also accessible to maybe countries that don't have strong
Internet infrastructures, so the build site is essentially crazy game.
I had an issue with crazy games at the beginning because the build size was too big, and I
had to find a way to reduce the build size.
They also didn't allow me to check the mobile flag for the game, even though it supported
mobile, because the build size was over 20 megabytes.
I think the original one when I first did the build was around 40 or 50 megabytes or something.
The solution, at least at the moment, is this amazing guide that you can find on Internet
world by pop car, I think, the guy is called, on his blog, and it's a really useful guide,
actually not just for web builds, but for GoDOT builds in general, that explains how to
reduce the build size of a project, so basically you have to create a custom template and strip
down parts of the engine that are not used.
So for example, my game did not use any 3D, so I just removed this part from the engine.
So this guide basically explains you how to remove all these unnecessary parts, and you
can improve your build size by a lot.
I managed to go under 20 megabytes for my game, I think around 70 megabytes.
So this allowed me to publish the game and also mark it as mobile available.
I recently discovered also talking with Dom, and that there are even more improvements
that can be done regarding the minification of the build size, for example, the game can
be compressed before being published, and I know there is some work being done on this
part of the engine to basically implement directly this function from the export menu.
So it does not have to be a manual changes and simplification that can be directly done
from GoDOT.
Another big issue that currently GoDOT have are iOS issues, so unfortunately, GoDOT web
builds do not work well on iOS devices, and I would love to share with you a workaround
with this, but I do not have one.
So if you are looking for stability, probably at the moment for web games, the most suitable
option will be to stick to GoDOT 3, because it does work better on iOS devices.
It seems like this is an Apple side problem mainly, so it should be more about communication
between GoDOT team and Apple for improving on this aspect.
I know that improvements are being made, but at the current state, GoDOT 4 still have issues
on iOS devices.
And the last issue I found that I would like to share was a problem about memory leaks.
So I found out after the release of my game that if the play session of the game was too
long, the game just crashed.
After some research on debugging, I realized that it was related to a memory leak problem,
and I wanted to pinpoint this in the presentation, not really to offer a solution about this,
because of course there are many different approaches for this.
But more as a reminder that building for web requires its own optimization, like building
for web is different than making games for mobile devices, and it's different of course
from making games for a desktop.
So web games require their own optimization, from one possible solution for memory leak
is object pooling, which is not instantiating all the ballots of the canon in this case,
for example, but every time the canon shows, but instantiating every ballot at the beginning
and then just move them around.
Another web optimization is for sure asset optimization, so being sure that your assets
are compressed, are small insights, also to improve the final build size.
So what is currently missing from Godot to make it competitive on the HTML5 market?
I tried to summarize what is missing from this slide.
We already touched some of those points, but to recap, the first two were for sure being
smaller build size and shorter loading times.
Smaller build size, as I said, there is a guide available, so currently it's not that
big of a problem, there are a solution and there is work done in this area.
Starting loading times is also another important aspect, because it's related to build size,
but small build size doesn't necessarily mean short loading times.
Currently, the way Godot loads the project is by loading the full project at the start
of the page, on landing on the web page, this is not the optimal way for loading times,
because it leads to longer loading times.
A better approach will be to make smaller pieces of the project and then loads those
parts on demand.
There are solutions that I recently discovered for shortening loading times, but currently
it's not something that's implemented directly in the engine, and that will make a big difference
in the web environment.
The third point is stability and compatibility across devices.
For example, we talk about iOS issues, this can be a problem for companies that want to
use Godot professionally for web games, stable performance.
In general, Godot offers good performance, and also with the right optimization, it's
doable, but it's another important aspect to notice.
And the fifth point, which is more of a personal consideration, I think, are official integrations.
Those are really important for publishing for web, or also HTML5 games in general.
I understand that being an open source project, it really depends on volunteers and on people
that are willing to create tools, create plugins that can connect to the project, while other
engines may have some official type of integrations, but this is really important.
For example, for analytics, for multiplayer, or in general game services, they're really
useful when publishing for web.
It would be great if there were some official integration, or maybe if the Godot association
will pay some volunteers just to work on official integrations.
So the conclusion is that let's try to answer the question, why should I choose Godot?
Can I choose Godot for making web games?
My personal answer to this question is Godot is really great in general, but specifically
also for web games, for usability, prototyping, speed, and fantastic growing community.
What I really like about Godot is that it's really, really fast to make game, to ship games
with it, and one of the interesting things about web is that it can also be used as platforms
for testing ideas, for receiving feedbacks, and Godot allows to ship very fast games and
iterate an idea, test if a prototype can work or not, and then eventually also move on another
platform, maybe use a web platform as a ramp to validate an idea, and then maybe move on
mobile or something else. It's also true that web platforms usually in the contract, they
don't allow to publish on other web platforms, but they don't care that much about mobile,
so your game can be both on web and on mobile, for example.
Being a general purpose engine, it does many things as we saw to do it, and you can build
on many different platforms. Of course, it's very difficult to compete with more specialized
engines like, for example, Construct 3. However, I think we are on the right track, I think
progress is being made, I have faith in the project in the community, so overall, I feel
like Godot can be in the future also a solid option for web game, in general, for game development.
Thank you. You can find also the slide of the presentation
from this QR code if you are interested, or on the link.
>> Is that much time left? Is there a really quick question?
>> Yeah, I'm kind of sold. My game is on mobile, and I think actually, publishing on
the web would be really good. If you could go a bit more into detail on the compression
issues, because my build size is 120 megabytes, and so it feels like a bit of a stretch to
get down to 20. >> Yeah, it's definitely two big sides for
web. I wanted to keep this presentation simple and not enter into details, because it will
take a big chunk of time, but to synthetize, you can use broadly for compressing your final
build size. Basically, when you export for web, you will have two main files, which are
PCK and WASMA, which are the two main files that make your web build, and you can compress
those files using this system, which is called broadly, to lower it down even more, and
you can really strip more than 50% of the build size. I think that in your case, a combination
of custom template and compression would already lower a lot the build size of the project.
I can share more specific details later after the talk, if you want.
>> So another round of applause, please.
>> [APPLAUSE]
>> Thank you. Thank you. [APPLAUSE]
