API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93408
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/godotfest2025-gdunit4-live-demo-technical-overview
Title: GdUnit4 live demo + technical overview

[Music]
Welcome to the last talk of today. Yes, day one of good office will have to end eventually and do you
know what sometimes doesn't feel like it ever ends testing things and all games need testing
also I've heard and there are many ways of going about it and some are more efficient than others
and covered in this talk is GD Unit 4 an embedded unit testing framework that allows for professional
great testing. GD Unit 4 was created by Mike Schulze, who is our loudspeaker of today. He brings with him
over 35 years of programming experience. Please welcome to the stage two, Mike Schulze.
of of of of of of of of of of of of of my job is my job is my job is my job is my job.
Every time go out, so mainly GD Unit is everyday I work on. So as I already said, the maintenance of
GD Unit 4 and also of GD 4 net. So that's the API for C# and I work almost four years on GD Unit now.
So it's maybe a long time. Was was my journey to the right version of GD Unit 4. So I was starting
2021 with GD Unit 3 for code 3. So the question is why I have created this framework. So I'm just
checking existing tools for testing. So whatever something but yeah. So I am spoiled as a Java
developer. So just want to have a GD Unit like framework. So okay, was not so. So I was thinking
maybe I can contribute to existing projects, but I see the chunks to make my own project and also
learning by doing and just implement GD Unit. So what's the vision? So I wanted to have full
integrated and go dot. It should be nice looking. It should be easy to install and it should be
feeling easy to use. So I also wanted to have as versions that have fluent syntax. So that was
still missing. And also for users that want test driven development, I want to have a simple
go to just create a test without that you have too much to learn before. So just click
create test. So what's now for currently the actual version is GD Unit 6 that some weeks ago
I created it's based on go dot four five. Then also we have the GD Unit for net for C#. There's
actual release candidate. So it's not really released now. It's still in progress. And also
in addition, there is a GitHub action. This will allow you to see a integration just when you work
with GitHub, you can create pull requests. That's easy to add this action that will ensure that
all the tests will run by the GitHub action and you get the result and you can ensure it's
hopefully nothing's broken. So there's actually 34 releases over 650 commits and over 90 pull
requests. So that's a lot. It's a few years ago. It's many. So then I have Discord zero. You can
join the over 200 active members. You have questions. I am still aware of them to answer. So we can
always join to GitHub or ask questions. So and here GD Unit is production ready. You can use. So
what's the core features actually? So it's embedded. You have a test inspector. You can show all your
tests and run. You have a test discovery. That's mean. You can discover all your existing tests
without manual searching. Just click a button and you will list all your tests. I will show
it to you later. Then also have easy to run the test just by context menu to click. You can use
the file system. You can go right to the script editor or use the test inspector to run your tests.
That's already known. You can create a test just easy by right click on the function that will
automatically create the test. You don't need to manually create a script and timing and just click
create the test. Then you have to fluent assertion. That's mean. You can write all your assertions to
verify that your code works as expected in readable channels with syntax. So this will get much
better overview of your test. It's easier to read. You have also zenerana. The zenerana allows you to
run your game zine or UI, whatever you want to test at least. That will allow you to simulate the
zine. You can simulate frames. You can simulate inputs like keyboard, mouse, touch screen, whatever
you want. You have also mock and spy support. That's something knows about. Mock and spy. What
is this? Okay. Something. Okay. Good. Then you have also implemented in the last version 6.0
This means the special hooks you can add that will works around your whole test session. This will
allow you to set up your whole test environment. Like for example, you need a database or something.
You can just create a session hook. Then you have start up and shut down for us. Then you can set
up your database and run it and run the test. And shut down for us. You can just clear up and
shut down the database. So it supports actually GD script and C#. Okay. Let's start. So to install,
the plugin is very easy. You have just go to the S sub lip type GD unit. They are both listed
actually. This is the new one for code.5.0. Just download and install it. I have already installed
so because of the limit time frame here. And then you need to activate the plugin. And after
activation, you will get the test inspector. This allows you to discover tests. Just by easy
simply click this button. And all your tests will be fine. Then you have also a settings dialog.
This will allow you to configure how GD unit works. So for example, you have update notification,
GD unit has an integrated update mechanism that will scan for new releases. And you will still
notify it over updates that will be listed here. And you can easily install just by pressing the
update button. So I am done the actual release. So there's no update. Okay. Then you also have
the console. GD unit console is just a listing of what your tests actually doing. For example,
we can just one here and test, test suite and test suite is a collection of tests. Then you get
immediate response. And you have the tests that are passed or failed listed here. Okay. I will
show you how to easily to create a test for example, I have created a simple class here. Just the
player with two methods, take damage and here. And you want to test them, just select the function,
use the context menu, create test, and where we go, the test is created. So this test creation
uses a template that you can also configure. You go to settings, then you have templates. And this is
the template you can configure. If you have some supported text you can use to extend or something
you don't need just delete it. Save it close and let credit again. Delete it. Okay. And credit again,
and you see the template that changed. And when you can test this, initial will be created just
with a template for an assertion is not implemented. And when you run it the first time, sure will be
failed. So we get inside feedback of your failures messages here. This will automatically provide you
an error message related to the assertion you're using. So that's just creating the test. I suggest
to use the AAA pattern. This means you should structure your test by arrange, act and other
variables. Arrange means just set up the test. What you want to test, act, execute the method you
want to test, and finally use assertions to test your method. Do it. That's what you expected. For
example, you can do it. Just be sorry. Let arrange.
Done. What happens? Oh, yeah.
I'm really nervous. Okay. I'm back. Take the match. What's
not showing? Yeah, I see it. So, okay, let's take damage with count of 30. And let assertion.
So june provides an set of assertions you can use. So it's type-based. We want to test in this case
the player takes some damage. And you have an assertions like for integers. And you can use just
the player check for health. And short be equal. You have also the oldest verify function. You can
equal. So 100 minus 30, short be 70. Okay, run the test. Okay. The test passes, but you see it's
yellow means you have a warning. This means you have often detected, often typically in
go dot when you use nodes that's not attached to the symmetry. And this you will create at least
memory leak. So you have a simple tool you can use to. I wanted to use other three.
Okay, run again. And no short be green. Okay, here we go. Sorry. It's not bad. Okay. And for
testing zines, we have a zener that allows you to load your zine, then you can assimilate just
frame by frame or assimilate user interactions, keyboard, mouse, touch screens, actions, input
actions, and also wait for signals or function results. I've prepared here, assemble zine.
Okay, the simple gene is just a room that you can walk using keys. And you put the door,
it will open and back, it will be closed. So to testing this zine, I have already prepared a test.
So no typos. The test has a test hook called test before. This is a function that will be called
for every test. So it's shared. So you can load your zine by using the zenerana, you get a
rana instance. And also you can use some utils on this rana to get, for example, the door
instance and the player, then the test itself, the test, the door will open and also the door is
closing. I will just run for a showcase. So go forward, go short open, test finished. And the next
test will close when you step back. All tests are green, so it looks good. How this works. So,
okay, you set the player position near the door. So it means the player will step right before the
door. And go back to the script. Then just simulate for 60 frames, just a little bit. Then we
simulate to press the key W, that's what moved the player forward. And the most important part,
part, you will simulate until a signal is emitted. So when the door opens, this will emit a signal
door opened with an ID from the door itself. It's the signal emitted, the test will continue.
And we have an assertion here for a signal at the state, the door is opened. And finally, we just
released the key W, the player will stop. And just for showcase or 60 frames, you wait.
Yeah, just to show that the player was stopping. So to show that the test is failing, we can, for
example, use a wrong ID. So the door, when emitted, the signal has an ID for, for example, one,
but we added one here, so two, a two will be not work. So the test will stay here forever.
Okay, let's run the test again. So the test will fail now.
Okay, you can see the test is failing. And you get an error message, the test I timed out.
So timed out for five seconds. That means, so the test you can configure a timeout.
As you can see here, this is an extra parameter you can set, and you're free to configure the
timeout. In general, when you struggle with tests, you need more information about what can I do,
so you can have a button here, just link to the actual documentation. I spent a lot of time in
the documentation. It's also not versioned. And you can step by step, go over the installation,
it will explain all the steps you need, then how to run tests, and get starting section,
then also for the sharp. So tomorrow is a workshop, so I will explain more, hopefully,
lots of struggle as today. And some information about what you need testing is,
how to integration testing, like zen testing, and also the complete set of assertions that
are available, you can find here. And also, for example, if you can look for timeout, I explained.
And you see test case parameter, there's all the parameters currently supported,
just jump into and you get the explanation how to use with always you have examples
to for easy understanding. Okay, summary, yeah, trust. Now you can test in the day.
Tune unit brings you a professional tool for testing in Goddard. It's fully embedded.
You can test in everyone, just simple logic, scenes, and UI parts. You can use test within the
development, if you like. And there's active community support, community support.
Yeah, there's a tomorrow workshop, you feel free to join.
Yeah, I'm done with Q&A.
Oh, sorry.
Thank you so much, Mike, for this wonderful talk. We now have a few more minutes for Q&A,
if there are any questions. Yes, there's a few. We'll see if we have time for that.
Thanks. Quick question. So what would unit testing for UI look like? Like would I
program that the mouse should move this many pixels left or right? Or is there another way to do it?
Sure, you can test your stuff. It's like you can start to see and simulate,
move your mouse pointer to relate position just by then can click, simply clicking
what you want and test what your UI interacts. The best way is test for signals. So that's the
supposed way. There is a feature in the pipeline that will allow you to test for pixel accuracy,
just you can compare the actual image with the current image. So like something has changed in
the UI, you will get immediately feedback about what's the difference that answers the question.
Hello. Thank you for the presentation. I just was curious about the scene runner and the tests,
as those seem useful for having scenarios and share the results with, for example, graphic
designers. For example, it would be easy to just change the effects, record it, because you have a
test kind of a scenario. You could have the test recorded and then that'd be part of the test
outputs. Have you thought about something like this? No, actually not. So you mean you're recording
a test session and just replay and expect the same result?
Ah, no, sorry. It does not support it. Feel free to create a feature request, so I will do it.
I have a question. So some of us use Godot addons that modify the Godot editor itself. So they run
in the Godot editor. Have you thought about in future having some sort of GD unit extension or
something that is able to test behavior inside the Godot editor itself rather than a separate game?
Is this something you thought about? Okay, when I correct understand you want to test
editor plugins. Yes, okay. Not yet. I get often this question. The actual problem is
the Godot API not allows me directly to test
plugins. So I need to analyze maybe a candidate to implement, but it's really hard. So
yeah, I need to check if it's possible or not. For now not, sorry.
Hey, Mike. Great talk. So I'm currently using Godot on a Godot free, unfortunately. I'm planning
to move over eventually. And I use that in the CI to run my tests before, obviously, to make
sure it goes green for a merger. I'm guessing you've got a sort of Docker container that I can
pull to run those jobs in GitHub action. And then my second question was, do you support
test coverage for the reports of the tests that you've carried out and tested?
Test coverage, yes. So GD unit supports two kinds of outputs of reports. So that the
actualization should be created a report. So for example, there is an XML and also
hard ML, HTML report. You can get the overview over the tests you have run. In this case,
was just the demo, a single test. And you will be listed all the tests here, also with including
failure reports. And XML is just a JUnit, Excel report. You can display, for example, you have
a CI workflow. There is, you can use the GUnit for action.
Just a simple example. Just on pull request, you can use the action. You run your tests.
You have a lot of options. You can configure here. And you get a report direct. So for example,
you can open, so I use this in my project tool. And we get some example reports,
I was all deleted. Let's just run.
Hello.
This is using the action. Nice.
I believe we are at time now, if you could wrap up the question or the answer.
Okay. There is an action, you can use an GitHub to execute and report. Sorry for the program stuff here.
Minor technical difficulties, but nonetheless, a great talk by make sure to please give another
round of applause for him.
[Applause]
