API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93387
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/godotfest2025-from-theora-to-av1-transforming-video-workflows-in-godot-4
Title: From Theora to AV1: Transforming Video Workflows in Godot 4

Now we all love a good bit of like images in rapid succession of one another, sometimes
also called video I've heard, and Godot is even able to put images together in video
playback, albeit with outdated tech.
Niest's filing is here today as a software developer creating interactive experiences,
games and apps, and he will present VTG, also in full video toolkit for Godot, a plugin
that brings the AV1 video standard to Godot.
Please welcome to the stage Niest's filing.
Thank you very much, yeah, so my topic is here from Theora to AV1, transforming video
workflows in Godot 4, maybe, but before I dive deeper into that topic, who am I?
My name is Niest's filing, and I consider myself as a coder, maker and creator, and
probably that more formally will be software developer and consultant. I'm self-employed,
and I do mostly interactive projects, like interactive installations, and therefore I
mostly use game engine technology. I used to work a lot with Unity. I used to work with
Unreal Engine, but lately I wrapped my head around Godot Engine and started my, or hour,
I did it with a friend, our first project, but more to that later. So what am I doing?
I'm doing like for Adidas, did some interactive installation in there, London Store. I did
Samper Robot together with a friend, which is a professional audio sampling application.
I work for Royal Render, which is a Render Manager and so on and so forth, just my website.
a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a
past year at Godokan 2024. I feel like I see some familiar faces around here and yeah, what
is Window Arcade? Window Arcade is a is an application framework, if you will. Window Arcade
leverages smartphones as controllers and allows for intuitive interaction with dynamic
content, meaning you have such thing here, which is our own creation that we can travel
around with. We have this demo application, which is called Island Racer. You can use
it like this, you have the screen, you have a QR code and a smartphone, scan the QR code
and then you can play a game or interact with whatever you have on that screen. And this
is how it looked like last year at Godokan, our little trailer, because we were so proud
that we were able to present that there. And as you see, you have a QR code, Robin Young
is scanning the QR code and then can play a game, which is sort of a super little tiny
racer, but people said it was fun. And we think so too. So now we have also a three-player
mode and we presented it at conferences, but now our vision is okay, we have so many big
screens everywhere on the streets behind shopping windows, you name it and what if we can combine
that with linear content? So not only showing linear content on the one hand, but showing
linear content, you approach this device, scan the QR code and then you can interact
with your favorite brand, imagine you are at a Nike Adidas or whatever store, you see
the new shoe, you can scan the QR code and then you move from a cool brand video to something
like an interactive experience where you can experience the shoe, the brand information,
that is the vision. And so what we want to do or what I want to do is combining interactive
content with high quality video. And that was the rabbit hole I went down. So what is the
status quo of video in Godot right now? We have video playback capabilities in Godot.
It is the stream video stream player node and inherits from control. You can think of
it as some sort of sprite 2D that is constantly updated with a current frame of the video,
obviously. But there is a drawback. The only supported format is OcTheora, which is not
bad per se, but it's a very old codec. So it is created by the CIF organization. It
is the good thing. It is royalty free. But there are some catches with it. The export
seems to be very buggy in certain applications. So the work around is then exported as H264
and then transcoded with F of NPAC. And also it's not actively developed since 2010. And
the funny thing is that I took a look at the FTP file server here where the releases are
and the alpha was released in 2010 and the beta is released in 2025. So there is probably
just a maintenance release and I feel like it could have something to do with Godot. I'm
not sure. But so the real catch is it has really, really large file sizes for high quality
video, especially if you're going 4K and there is no hardware decoding available for that.
So not very up to date. I mean, it works, but not up to date. So what alternatives do
we have? We have other extensions. We have the ERAR team, F of NPAC plugin. It's F of
NPAC based. And there is no hardware acceleration. The same goes for the GDE goes and plug in
no hardware acceleration. And there is this reference implementation which only has support
for VP9 and also no hardware acceleration. Okay. So and what about F of NPAC? How do we
feel about F of NPAC as a dependency? Yeah, it is a cool library, but it is a very large
dependency, as you might know, and it's LGPL. And that somehow prevents us using that when
we want to steady link against it and use it in proprietary software, for example, on
the app store. So and also it's probably not a very good idea if we in the future, I don't
know. This is just a suggestion, what I'm presenting here. But if we want to integrate
something new into Godocor, we probably don't want to depend on F of NPAC. So what other
codecs are there? There is H264 and H265, which are, hmm, yeah, very popular, but very
not royalty free. And they are, so this is what we call patent and combered. They're
a patent pool. They say, yeah, you're using this algorithm here, and we have a patent
on it, so give us your money. Not for everything. There's this use case where you can distribute
H264 videos free on the internet to your users, and you don't have to be or you you
aren't charged royalties for that. But if you are creating devices or software that can
read or produce those codec files, then you have to pay royalty fees as well. And it's
very problematic with HEVC even more because, so open source projects like Fidora and open
Susan, they say, no, no, we can't do that. It's too problematic. We remove that from
our Mesa build and open SUSE as well. So what does the Godoa documentation say about this?
They say H264 and H265 cannot be supported in Corrugado, as they are both encumbered
with software patents. And so, yeah, that aligns with what I found. Alternative AV1.
So it is governed by the Alliance for Open Media. So always, you always make it packed
with a devil. You have Amazon or the leading companies in this Alliance, Apple, ARM, Cisco,
Google, who are why they all have patents in this patent pool. But they say, you're free
to use it, do what you want. But there's always a catch. External patent pools have claims,
like the CIS will, I think, Phillips is part of that pool. They say, yeah, you cannot do
that. We have also patents that are touched somehow by any algorithms in there. So we
want money. So you better give us our money no matter what they say. But in reality, so
it's very, very complicated. But in reality, this is probably the best we can get in terms
of royalty freeness. Because encoding videos, it is such a long history of algorithms that
build upon each other. So if you really would want to create something that is truly royalty
free, that would be very, very lucky guess, because there are so many patents, like over
2,000, 3,000 patents. So I think this is the best we can get for a modern codec. So the
documentation says, everyone is royalty free, but it remains slow to decode on the CPU.
And hardware decoding support isn't readily available on all CPUs and use yet. Yeah, that
is partly true. I mean, but I think we moved on from there. There are good software decoders
and also encoders. I'll come to that later. And there's also many current hardware devices
and chips. They do have a dedicated hardware unit. Small list, I don't go through it all,
but as you can see, M3 on the Apple M3 and newer, A17 Pro, RTX 30, they all have dedicated
units in their hardware. So it's going to be there. People are committing to this new
format. Hardware coding is a little less, but it's coming. It's an RTX 40. And this
seems to be a good bargain. You can get even an Intel card for, I think, 100 to 150 euros
that can really efficiently encode AV1. So what software decoders do we have? We have
lib AOM, which is the reference implementation by the AOM group. Then we have David, which
is created by the video LAN organization. Those guys are the ones who also create the
VLC we all love and need to use very often. And the lib GAV1, it's created by Google.
So there are things available. And lately, David has gotten some very good improvements
from the ARM group. So it works very performant. And what about software encoders? We have
the lib AOM, AV1, SAVT, AV1. So there are many and they are all integrated into FFmpeg.
And in this case, FFmpeg is not the problem because you don't want to probably use software
encoding in your software and your game. I mean, you might probably. But so if you just
want to use that as an external tool, we don't have to worry about FFmpeg.
Okay. So what I did is I did some testing. So this is not representative at all, but to
somehow get a gist of what you can do. This is on my Mac Mini M4 entry level device. So
nothing special. I encode the central trailer, 1080p 24 frames per second. And it's around
five times real time, the encoder. So it employs all the 10 cores available. But I mean, that's
cool, I think. It's pretty fast for a software encoder. So I have no worries there. And if
you want to go with 4K video like I'm showing here, it's encoding the Netflix food market,
which is a demo made by Netflix because they are very interested in video streaming, as
you can imagine. And 4K 60 FPS. So this is encoded with, I would say medium to good quality
settings. And it's a third of real time. So about encoded with 20 frames per second,
which is also pretty nice. I think comparing that to years ago, when we had to wait forever
to get every one encoded. So and the good news is that we also have support in Vulkan right
now. We have these two extensions, we have decoding extension and coding extension. And
that makes for a really good foundation in my, yeah, for me, as I think that could be
a really good foundation for a cross platform hardware decoding support in Godot. But you
always have to be aware, this only works on dedicated hardware units. They need to have
those AV1 specialized units. They cannot employ general purpose shader units. So and
also what really nice is that they merge the Vulkan encoding to f of mpeg 8. And so we
can use it from there as well. So this is my suggestion. I call it video toolkit for
Godot VTG, I don't know, since just a working title, I'm not sure that I will stick with
that. What is video toolkit for Godot? It's a C++ GD extension abstract base classes video
player. And what I imagine is to have some sort of software decoding as a baseline for
all platforms. So in principle, it's like before we have Arc Theora, it works software
decoded on each and every platform. But I would like to add AV1 as a software layer. And then
go when hardware evolves and we get implementations there that we do hardware decoding on specific
platforms where available. And the only format supported would be for the software decoding.
I feel like AV1, I use opus as audio format. The container format is web m. I'm not sure
about that because it's not really specified, but it works. And I'm using in my proof of
concept here, I'm using SAV1, which is a thin wrapper library around David and lib web
m. And SAV1 is done in plain C. It cares about things like file loading, decoding, threading,
and optional color conversion if you want. I do that in shader because it's more efficient.
But yeah, so we don't have to start from scratch. And that is implemented as video player soft.
So this is how it looks like. So on the left side you see the editor. I did a small plugin
sorry for the very, very small video. I could have made a little bigger at least. So it's
the central trailer playing right now. And you see it's software decoded 24 frames per
second and it's around about I think half a core here. And this one as well. And then
I move on to the food market example. And that decodes. I mean, super fluently, but puts
a little bit more pressure on the CPU. But I mean, it's okay. If you really want to have
some sort of baseline as works on every platform, I'm probably okay for me if I'm using the
Mac mini in my installation. And I still have lots of CPU power left. So that's the baseline,
the fallback. What about hardware decoding? I think we can employ video toolbox on Mac OS.
We can use Vulkan on Linux and Windows. And we could even support multiple formats. We
can use AV1 as the default, but also H264 and H265. And you might say, yeah, but you told
us about all this patent problems before. Yeah. But in this case, although I'm no lawyer,
this is not a big problem because we're not providing the actual code to the user because
we would only use hardware with dedicated decoding units and APIs on top of it. And
that will be the hardware companies would have to pay, like NVIDIA, Apple, they would
have to pay these patent fees. And this implemented as video player metal. And in future, this
would be video player Vulkan. So how does it work? I create two image textures, pass
the native handles in this case for the metal back end, put it into the decoder thread,
and that continuously decodes and blitz just on the GPU. So nothing on CPU here. So now
we have this little button here. I can enable hardware playback, press play, go to top and
then I can see that this is a bit much right now because it doesn't have the focus. Now
it goes back to 30%. And this is 4K 60 FPS. So that's pretty nice. Roadmap, I go a little
bit quicker about that. Software decoding at first, then hardware decoding on Mac OS and
IS because I already have this prototype that is working and then move on to software decoding
and hardware decoding on the rest of the platforms. So I haven't touched Vulkan yet and I'm not
sure if Godot has all the API necessary in the GD extension, but I'm sure I can figure
that out. And maybe I can talk to the render back end creators of Godot. So my repository
is just a proof of concept, MIT license. Check it out. I'm happy to get feedback. So the
conclusion is Octheora is an old file format. It has large files for high quality, no hardware
decoding whatsoever. I want to add modern codec support like AV1, SGT extension and
software decoding as a baseline. It works on every platform and hardware decoding dependent
on the render back end. And so that will be metal and Vulkan. And I have one more thing.
This is, sorry for the very crappy video here, but this is my side project which I want to,
which I want to use with the new plugin. And I'm so happy to show you this because it's
a note based video tool. So you can use video mixing tools. You can have a video playback
mix that, I mean, it's a very basic example right now, but I have a vision for it to have
custom shaders, generative art. So think of it as a vjang tool. So you can sit on your
couch, connect it to your external monitor, and then play around and be creative. And
then create your own panel where you have sliders, mini screens that you can then call
here and attach those slider to some sort of mixing value here. And then you can create,
you don't have to fiddle around while you're doing your vjang show. You don't have to fiddle
around in your note. You can have your custom UI. And that's it for now, guys. I'm so happy
that you were here and we're listening to my talk. And yeah, give me feedback. This is
my web page. If you want to get in touch, LinkedIn, but I'm around. And thank you so
much for listening.
So, yeah. Yeah, we now have five more minutes for a Q&A if any questions arise from the
audience. Yes.
Yeah, I think I was doing on Android. There's an exo player that you can just plug in and
it goes straight through. Maybe you can explain how that works to me at some point.
Sorry, the axo. There's an exo player that can play straight through and it doesn't even
touch Kado and just puts video streams straight into the game.
I don't know actually what the axo player.
Exo. Exo. I haven't heard that before. So, I cannot tell you anything about that. For
me, it's just to not to have any special solution for any special platform. What I think is
what we need is to cover all platforms in the same way. So, the software first and then
we can move on and to integrate certain hardware desires. So, I'm sorry. I don't know about
the exo player, but yeah, maybe it's the alternative.
Some questions from the audience. Yes. You need to talk into the microphone.
Any feedback on performance on mobile? I have to say, I just started this project. So it
is, I mean, I'm working on this for, I don't know, two months, but what I can say is that
if you are on Apple devices, it would perform even with a software version pretty much along
this lines here. And if you employ the dedicated hardware unit, then you won't see any impact
on your CPU at all. And that would be the same with the Google devices because I'm working
mostly on Mac, but I know Google Tensor devices also would have the same performance. But
then if we want to have that, I need to move on to the Vulkan back end. But then we would
see very, very high performance results. Yes.
I think this has been it for questions. No, it has not.
I'm not too familiar with the different codecs, but what would the size difference be in terms
of file size between the old version and the new one that you introduced?
That is a really good question. I cannot really answer that because there is so many different
settings if you want to compare the quality. And you're right. I will do that. I know you
really want to see the, but I can't tell. But what I feel like is this, what I can tell
you, the central demo, which has really good qualities, quality and has a couple of seconds
videos in just nine megabytes. You wouldn't get that quality. You wouldn't get that quality
in Octheora. But I hear you and I will do some benchmarking so that people can really compare
that to each other. Yeah. And with that, we are at time. Again, please give another massive
round of applause for this wonderful talk by Niels. Thank you so much.
