API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93376
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/godotfest2025-a-peek-under-the-hood-technical-learnings-from-halls-of-torment
Title: A Peek Under the Hood: Technical Learnings from Halls of Torment

[MUSIC]
>> Thanks for the great introduction.
The title is "Speak Under the Hood."
I would like to give you a deep dive into
the technicals of Hall of Torment.
First, a quick introduction.
I've been already introduced,
but I kind of shoved it in into my presentation.
I'm Paul, I'm game designer and programmer,
and I do a lot of other stuff at Chasing Carrots.
I joined the company at 2015,
and I've been the creative director of Halls of Torment.
And back there, this is me making a Dr. House impression.
Yeah, if you go on our website,
this handsome fellow will greet you
at the top of our website.
This is not narcissism.
He didn't do this by choice.
We kind of, the way I remember it,
I probably remember it wrong,
but the way I remember it is that we used to have
like a show reel of pictures of insights into our studio.
And with the WordPress update, the plugin broke,
and it stuck on this one and since then,
he's sitting there greeting you nicely.
And why do I introduce Dominic?
Dominic is our co-founder and tech lead.
And most of this talk is about his work.
So whenever I say we did this, we optimized this,
we implemented the best thing ever.
It's mostly him, actually.
So I'm just a messenger.
I do have our understanding of what's going on,
yet the details are in his head.
Yeah, this is our team.
We are 10 people currently, six full time and four part time.
And yeah, we've grown again a little bit,
but we try to keep a small footprint.
And this is the latest game that we released.
It came out in out of early access last year in September.
And just two weeks ago, we released like a DLC,
and we also released on consoles and on Game Pass.
And yeah, it was rough.
No, it wasn't that rough or for ride, actually.
It was pretty smooth sailing for us with this game.
We really were pretty quick with the first playable
and within one month.
And this is how the game looked like after one month.
We had a working loop with all the stuff
after a very short iteration.
Back there, you see my rendition of the campfire,
which I was very proud of.
It took the entirety of five minutes of doing this.
And it got replaced by something more flashy.
But yeah, it was completely playable.
And then after six months, we went into early access.
And that was like, yeah, this was pretty quick.
And we had to be quick because our money
was running out back then.
And that obviously that situation proved.
Yeah, what does this talk about?
Yeah, I'd like to show you how we shipped a commercial game
or how the innards of a commercially shipped game look like.
I'd like to talk a little bit about our learnings
from the development process.
I will talk about measurement of code performance.
And I will also talk about performance improvements.
Only on CPU, GPU is no beast.
It's a 2D game.
There is not much going on with shaders or rendering.
And what is it not about?
It's always important to exclude certain things
to fix expectations.
It's not about beautiful code.
We didn't have the time to spend on code aesthetics.
We kind of had to be quick.
So this is reflected in our structure as well.
We, yeah, as I said, prepare for some crude stuff.
It's always easy to say, yeah, we should have done this differently.
But sometimes you don't know better, right?
And you have to learn.
And today, we have ideas how we would improve it today
and make it better today.
But yeah, that's in the past.
It is about the learnings.
So yeah, I invite you to be critical with me together.
Yeah, let's dive into the big picture.
If you open a project in Godot, the first things
you would look into to understand the game
is to probably look into the main scene that opens up
and look at the globals.
And here, I wanted to pick out the most biggest culprits
in this area.
So up there, we have an async resource loader.
The resource loader, we've implemented a small thing
that allows us to queue up loading of resources.
And at some point, when the loading is finished,
we get a signal and we can just use them
without any impact on the main thread.
Then there is like a platform, a platform global
that allows us to connect to different services,
mostly Steam, but also console codes and like achievements
and so forth is handled there.
We have this global, a big global file
where everything is tied together.
This is like the God global, basically.
Everything happens there.
Then there is this game state thing
that is also quite important.
It tracks basically in which state the game is
and it informs other nodes about state changes
and how they should behave.
They can react to it.
And there is like everything UI is connected there.
All UIs are instantiated in here and kept there
and then switched between in this global thing
and so on and so on.
So the others are self-explanatory like FXs and down there,
as the DLC manager, you might guess what that does.
Now we have like the entry point
by how is all of this connected.
So I talked about the game state.
So the game said basically a very simple state handler
with a couple of states and kept in an enum.
There are much more than I listed here
but those are the most important ones.
Yeah, once someone says set state,
then the state change signal is emitted
with the previous and the current state
and everybody can connect to that
and then just do their thing.
It's very, very, very basic.
So when you start the game, the splash screen pops up.
Then after a short amount of time,
you land in the overworld.
You see the campfire with the characters.
Then you are in the overworld state.
And right here, you can select different things in the scene
and that opens up full screen menus
that are handled by the global menus.
And those are actually like they are there all the time.
They are not like removed or deleted or anything.
They are always there.
They just react to the global state and then show up.
And when you enter the game, you're in the game.
This is where the fighting happens
and where all the damage is done.
And there are two outcomes to this.
Either you die.
Oh yeah, of course, there's also like a connection
to the global menus when you pause the game
or when you open something.
Then you can die, you can survive.
And after that, you go back to the overworld
and this is like the, this is the gist of it.
This is how the game is structured.
There's not much more beyond that, right?
And, but the meat of the game is, of course,
in this in-game thing.
This is where the game starts to drop frames
or whatever or crash or this is the most complex state.
We are in, okay.
So what do you need to make a survivor like?
So for once you need to meet a world,
where all the action takes place,
you need a player to deal with the damage.
You need monsters to absorb all the damage
and then you need all the bells and whistles
that basically make it a game like a power-ups
and effects and explosions.
And once you have those, the space line,
you want to add new content.
So how you do it?
You take the original, copy them
and change them a little bit, right?
So yeah, you get more players,
get more monsters with different behaviors,
with some changes and you get more stuff basically
for the game.
And after the tenth copy you do and change,
you realize, huh, maybe we should be able,
but a little bit more elegant about this.
We should find a way to make it, yeah, flexible maybe
and not messy.
But let's look at the requirements for us
because there is much more to that.
For once we have a very elaborate damage system,
we need to trace damage.
We need to know where damage comes from
to track it for quests and for different conditions.
Also for statistics players want to look at their character
and see the DPS and what caused how much damage
and so forth, especially at their end slate.
And we also have like the problems,
problem that we have bullets that spawn bullets
that's both explosions and AOEs.
And you'd still have to be able to track back
who did the original damage, who was the originator there.
So this is also adds to the complication and the complexity.
And next to that, we have dynamic stats.
So everything has a stat or not a stat like multiple stats,
like your character has a whole list of stats.
Skeletons can have health and speed and damage
and so forth, projectors as well.
And you can equip items and you can,
you can basically unequip items and get power ups
that are timed, so those also need to be traced
because players need to know where the stats come from
and how they are changed.
And they should be reversible as well.
So think of power ups that are temporary and so forth.
And so we need composition.
That's what we figured out.
We need to be able to have a modular system.
So those components need to be reusable, of course.
They should be able to talk to each other,
but they should not be interdependent.
So they should be able to function without knowing
of other components or being dependent on our components.
They should work on their own.
They should also be dynamically composable.
So if you add a component to an entity,
it should automatically kind of hook into the system
and work correctly.
And yeah, you would think as a software designer
or software engineer, that's the case for interfaces, right?
But GDScript doesn't have interfaces,
so we have to come up with something else, obviously.
So in the GDScript docs, in the documentation,
you might stumble upon the concept of duck typing.
So yeah, when I see a bird that swims like a duck
and quarks like a duck, I call that bird a duck.
So, and in my case, I translated it in my head into,
if an object can be smashed, don't care what it is,
just smash it.
And in my opinion, smash typing is a cooler term for that.
But yeah, basically you look at the name of methods.
And if something has a method that is called XY,
then you can call it and use it.
And you just assume that it's the right function, right?
So this is a little bit problematic.
It's basically, if your vocabulary has a certain word,
I assume you know what it is, right?
So I can say, it is a little bit iffy and unsafe, right?
Because you have to stick to certain names
and you have to make a lot of assumptions.
So yeah, this is like a little bit, yeah.
Yeah, we were considering it and thinking,
okay, this might, this is a source of error,
but we decided to, whatever, let's go with it.
Let's build a system upon this entire concept.
So, and that was fun.
So how did we do this?
How did we implement inter-object communication with this?
So basically, what we did is introduce an intermediate
immediate here for those components.
And we are a little bit, back then we were a little bit
unity-brained because we used to work with unity.
So in everything you will see here,
kind of will remind you of unity if you worked with it.
So we called it thing GameObject.
And yeah, and then you have like components
that are part of this, that are children of the GameObject.
And every game object, every component has a reference
to that GameObject, basically.
And via the GameObject, they can indirectly access other
components via the get method and get signal,
or has method, or has signal, sorry, methods.
So they ask the GameObject, hey, do you have any component
that implements do surgery?
And the component looks up and looks in its cache
because we are caching a lot.
That's what was one of our performance improvements.
And yes, here you go.
And so let's look at the GameObject itself.
It has a couple of very simple functions
that allows you to connect and disconnect the signals.
And this is like globally, not globally,
like locally in the neighborhood,
in these three of the GameObject.
So it goes through all the components
and hooks up your signal, or hooks up to all signals
that are called this way, basically.
And there are methods to get children with a certain method,
that implement a certain method name, in different flavors,
like, and signals, of course.
And the last one allows you to get all the components within
a tree that implement a certain method.
And yeah, we first did this in GDScript,
and then we realized, oops, we use it all over the place.
We use it everywhere, and it slows us down.
So then we moved it to C++, into a C++ module, actually.
And later, we also integrated other features
into it that allowed us to work with dynamic modifiers.
I will come to that later.
So after writing a couple of components in the system,
we noticed that all of the components
would share a lot of boilerplate within them,
like initializing and getting the GameObject.
So we figured, yeah, we should make a base class for that,
and we did this as well.
This was also GDScript first, and then at some point,
we decided, yeah, that needs to be C++ as well,
because these two things are going hand-in-hand with each other.
OK, so let's take an example.
We have this little skeleton that's all over our game.
And there is this scenery of this,
and up there, like the root of that is the GameObject.
I made a little icon, so we can identify, OK,
this is the GameObject, don't mess it up.
And let's look at the monster input component.
That one actually makes decisions for the entire monster,
and it decides, for example, where the monster wants to go.
So the monster input says, yeah, dear GameObject, tell me,
if is there someone that moves the GameObject around?
And is there something that allows
me to set the direction where we want to walk to?
And the GameObject looks it up, and it
finds the skeleton through the emover
and returns it as a reference.
And then in the monster input, it
can check if something useful returned,
and then we can set the direction of the monster.
And similar to that, there are some other components
that react to certain signals, like when the health change,
when we get hit, when we are killed, as skeletons do.
And they ask the GameObject, hey, could you
connect us to a signal that has this name, like killed or health
changed?
And the GameObject says, yeah, there's
one that's called health.
You don't know about anything about health,
but it will connect you to the signal, and everybody's happy.
And nobody knows anybody except the GameObject
makes the patching, and there's complete decoupling.
And the nice thing about the connect signal stuff
is that it also works retractively.
So if I connect to a signal, and there is no signal of that name,
and later on, a component is added with that signal,
the connection still happens.
So I only do this once in initialization,
and the GameObject has a cache of all this stuff pretty neat.
There are still some problems with that, unfortunately,
for once, you really need to be consistent with your naming
for the methods, because the names are defining the function
that they are like an end good, though, and no editor
will save you there.
You have to be very, very strict about it.
Also, the other thing is that the methods with the signals
and methods with the same name also
need to have an identical signature, or your calls
will go nowhere, and you will have a bad time.
I'm debugging this.
And the other thing is that has method
and has signal are quite expensive.
So we kind of only do this during initialization,
like asking the GameObject about certain components.
We don't do this, like, per frame.
At the beginning, we did, and then we realized, oops,
this is not good.
And we cache a lot of stuff.
And also, there is this problem of ambiguity.
So let's say you have multiple components
that implement the same method.
Usually, what you get is the GameObject
will return you the first appearance of a component
that implements a certain method.
And maybe you don't want this first one.
You want to have, like, the third or a bunch of them.
So yeah, there are a couple of workarounds
that it doesn't happen often, but we
did have some problems with that.
We try to avoid this, that we have components
with the same interfaces or methods.
Or we kind of break our pattern there and say, OK,
in this special case, we have a direct reference
to a specific component.
Or there is maybe the possibility
to differentiate them by other attributes
and just get all of them at once and then pick the right one
during initialization, which is also expensive, unfortunately.
But it's a possibility.
So a dynamic stats, as I said, everything, almost everything,
every entity in the game that is a little bit bigger,
like monsters, characters and bullets and explosions,
have stats.
And this is like a selection of stats of the player.
And they are also modified to see that the green numbers
are the changes in the character sheet.
So let's say not only the character has stats,
but also abilities that a character can have additional stats.
And let's say the player picks up an ability,
for example, phantom needles.
Then you have up, down there, you have a list of keywords.
And those are categories.
They basically filter certain modifiers for us.
And when the player picks up or in a level up picks up a trait,
the trait also has those keywords.
And for you, in this instance, this trait
is specific for phantom needles.
It doesn't influence the critical bonus of any other ability
or weapon only this one.
So we have a filtering system.
We can do this with elemental damage, fire damage, magic,
bullets, projectiles, melee, and so forth.
So this is very important so people, so players,
can strategize and pick the right upgrades.
So how did we implement this?
This is also reused all over the place.
It was the most performance critical point in our whole thing,
because you deal damage all the time,
and damage needs to be calculated, like hundreds
of times per frame.
So again, we have our player.
And they picked up the phantom needle ability.
The ability has some stats, damage, crit bonus, et cetera,
and categories.
And then the player gets the trait.
Like, these are components that are attached
to the player game object.
And the trait says to the game object, hey,
I have so-called modified value--
modifier, sorry, I have a modifier.
Tell every modified value that has the modifier name, crit
bonus, that they should get plus 20%, right?
And also, only check the category phantom needle.
So the game object has a list of all those modified values
that they get set up during initialization.
And then it changes those according
to what the modifier set.
And inside of those two components,
we have a data type, actually, like a ref-counted object
that handles all of this.
And I just wanted to show you how it looks in code.
Like, when you have this one component, you create--
this is inside the phantom needle's ability.
In the ready, it initializes the game object.
It creates this modified value.
And it has, usually, has more than one modified value,
of course, like damage and time and speed, et cetera.
And this also registers it with the game object.
And down there, you-- like, oops, can I go back?
Yes, I can go back.
No, I can.
Yes, I can.
And down there, you see how you access the value.
And the same thing, on the sending side, like the modifier,
it's very analogous.
And you have like a little create function there.
You have to set the name for the statistics.
There is always an additive component
and a multiplicative component for all modifiers
and the categories.
And in the end, you have to tell the game object
that it has to update all of this.
So as you might have deduced by now,
we have forked Godot for ourselves,
so we can fiddle around with its C++ code.
And that's not an unusual thing.
A lot of people do this.
You can see it like 23,000 forks up there.
So we were not alone with this, fortunately.
And we tried GD extension for our stuff,
but we found out that back then, at least,
the GD extension interface had some performance overhead
that we weren't able to accept.
So we decided to maintain our own fork with modules in there.
And it's pretty cool because we could also fix stuff ourselves.
We could integrate pull requests that
haven't been added to the main branch yet.
And we also would develop a better understanding
of the technology we are using, which is always a good thing.
And also, we made the awful fork public.
You can access it on GitHub.
Just make sure that you check out the right branch, which
is CC for free.
And it's also useful if you want to look at our profiling
integration as well.
So this comes later.
I will come back to that.
Yeah, so let's talk about performance.
So what makes a simple 2D game perform poorly?
So how can a simple game like that run into performance issues?
Well, you can see it in the screenshots.
We have a lot of stuff going on, especially
towards the end of a run.
We have hundreds of entities per frame that are destroyed
and created again.
So this is where your CPU starts to half and puff.
Yeah, what it was about to say?
I lost my material thoughts.
Anyway, lots of stuff happening.
And we had to find out where our bottlenecks are.
We had to speed it up, especially for handheld devices.
We had to figure out how to make this work.
And there is this one quote by Michael Abert in his graphics
programmer, Blackbook.
He advises us to measure our improvements, of course.
And I think it's a sound advice to not work blindly,
like look at what's not working well, improve it,
and see if your improvement took effect.
So it's basic advice, but some people don't regard it.
So we entered profiling, and we quickly
figured out that the Godot profile wouldn't suffice in our case.
So what you see there is the Tracy Profiler.
It's a pretty awesome tool.
You can up there, you have a bar of all the frames
that have been recorded.
And if you drag over there, it also
creates screenshots for you.
You can turn off this feature, but we
liked it to have to see what's going on there.
And further down, you have this nice flame chart
that shows you all the call stacks in chronological order.
And you can inspect them like every call
and look at how often a certain method gets
called, how long it is, and so forth.
It's very, very useful.
And it was fun to use it, at least in the first two weeks.
Because after two weeks, we had the most gravest bottlenecks
done, and then you start grinding at the bones, basically.
Yeah, there are two types of profiling.
The one is sampling, which is basically
you hook up your profiler, and it connects to your game,
basically like a debugger.
You need debug symbols for this.
Problem is you don't get a GD script call stacks for that.
And then there is instrumented, which we used.
It needs-- you need to build a good old template for your game
that has integration hooks compiled in.
And I'll show you a couple of places where we did this.
And we also tried different profilers.
The first profiler we used was Optic, which
is pretty-- did a pretty decent job.
Superluminal, very-- yeah, very-- what's the word?
Yeah, very-- it was very, very good.
And yeah, impressive, very impressive piece of software.
Unfortunately, it was paid when we were in proprietary,
and we wanted to have something leaner and quicker
than we can use.
And then we landed at Tracy.
And Tracy was basically the best thing
that could happen to us regarding in this situation.
It's open source.
It has a very low overhead.
It's very lean and quick, and it's still
maintained and gets regular updates.
Pretty cool.
So how did we manage to integrate profiling with Tracy?
So we-- as I said, we needed to integrate profiling
for GDScript as well, because we have still a lot of GDScript
code in our game.
And we started by identifying where
we want to place all the hooks of Tracy.
And we created like this profiling header
that we added to the Godot.
And this one includes like the Tracy dependencies,
and it defines a bunch of macros
that lead to Tracy IP API calls.
We did this via macros, because we
would like to be able to switch the profiling on and off
before compilation, so we could make a profiled template
and a non-profile template.
And we also think that it would make sense
to have something official of this manner,
like that we would have on profiling template,
where you could hook up different profilers, or at least
Tracy, for that matter.
Yeah.
And then we would go through the code
and see where we could put all this macros in Godot
to get all the information that we needed.
Some excerpts from that.
What follows are a couple of places.
It's not the whole picture.
I can't give you a whole tutorial
how to integrate profiling in there.
But I would tell you that just go to our repository,
check it out, and go to profiling H. And then you can just
rip-grab the macros and see where we put them.
And it will make perfect sense.
The ify part was to get this to work with scans,
like the build system, to get the Tracy integration in there.
So it needs a little bit of understanding of scans,
but it is absolutely doable.
So the first thing, in main CPP, you
want to capture the frames.
These are the little bars at the top.
So you just plop in that macro here, profile frame,
and you're done.
You get the reading from the frames.
Then you, of course, you want to also profile memory allocations
and see how much memory gets allocated and freed.
So this is in memory.cpp.
And of course, you need to also trace wherever memory gets freed.
So this is, again, not the whole picture.
Then we want to look into all the notifications
on basic notes, or all notes for that matter.
So we trace here the ready, the process, and the physics
process, and in the same file, the x3 and already already
said ready.
But back there, that was--
oh, yeah, physics process, entity, x3, ready.
And this is the most important part.
This is our GD script profiling hook.
This is in GDScript.cpp.
Whenever a call happens, we run into this.
And we pass the method name of this call.
And then we see in Tracy, which GDScript function
has been called.
And you would also want to do this in the object CPP file.
There's another call function that also needs tracing.
And as I said, whoever is interested in this,
just check out our repository.
So how does profiling look like, actually,
if you're in a typical procedure?
This is how Tracy looks like if you open it up.
And so you start tracing, right?
This is what you see.
Then you run the game.
Then if you have integrated the Tracy API in your game
or in your template, you will see the process pop up
down there at the bottom, like holes of torment.
And Tracy will recognize it.
Then what you have to do is to play your game
to a point where your slowdown happens.
So you need to reach the scenario
where the problems pop up.
Then you start the process with connect.
So Tracy will immediately start profiling and recording.
You don't want to record more than 10 seconds of your game
because in our case, we had multiple of gigabytes of data
after a few seconds because there's
a lot of things going on.
And at the end, you press stop, and then you can analyze.
And obviously, those two steps are the work
intensive ones.
The other ones are just clicking buttons, right?
So let's look into that as well.
So I wanted to give you a little overview
of how Tracy looks like.
So just very quickly, very roughly.
Up there, as I said, the frames, every bar is one frame.
The red big ones are, of course, the bad ones.
You want to look into that, what slows you down there.
And further down, you have this flame chart.
And it's very, very extensive.
And you can zoom in and out, and it feels really cool.
And you have a lot of other tools,
like you can look into statistics and histograms.
And you have a lot of analysis tools on your hands.
I just wanted to give you an idea what's behind this.
Also, you can look for certain symbols
and look for methods and see how often they get called,
how long they get called, and what's the median and the average
and so forth.
You get really, really a good picture of what's going on.
OK, I mentioned the auto player at the very beginning,
the global at the very start.
The problem of reaching the part where your game slows down
is you have to play there.
And in our case, it was always in the last couple
of minutes of a run.
So you can imagine, we don't want to play a game like half
an hour until we reach spot one and see
if our improvements have taken effect.
So we created like a game mode where the game plays itself,
basically.
And we could do this also for, not only for profiling,
but we could also brute force crashes.
And with detailed logging, we could find out
where our game crashed.
So we would run four instances on a single PC of this game
in auto play mode.
And it would run even faster than normal
because we have specific settings there.
And whenever the game crashed overnight,
we would have like a lock.
And we would see what where in which circumstances
the crashes happened.
And we catch really a lot of issues with that method.
It's pretty effective.
And also, we could identify soft logs in the game,
which is also like bugs where players get frustrated
because, oh my god, the final boss didn't spawn
or the final boss didn't drop the cool item
or stuff like that.
And the command line arguments with which we started,
those auto play instances is fixed FPS 30
and disabled easing.
This connects the game from real time synchronization.
And so every frame gets--
after a frame is done with calculation,
it automatically moves to the next frame.
So the game runs with a maximum possible speed
on a single core, which is very handy
because it's faster, obviously.
So let's cover improvements that we did.
So obviously, the most impact we were able to achieve
with moving stuff from GD script to C++.
And we did this with our component infrastructure,
as I already mentioned.
And modifiers and modified values also
became part of that structure.
In the beginning, we used nodes for everything
because we thought this is the good way.
And apparently, it's not the good way.
So we moved to ref-counted objects.
And eventually, we put it into the C++ code
and made it way faster.
And there were also some culprits
among those scripts that were very heavy on performance,
which was everything that has to do with damage dealing,
damage calculations, effects in terms of status,
effects like burn damage or lightning and stuff like that.
And character and projectile movement,
those are also per frame stuff that was very performance heavy.
Then we figured out, hey, our hit detection
isn't optimal as well because we used area 2Ds for everything.
So if you have a big AOE and you hit 200 monsters,
yeah, OK, the damage dealing will slow you down,
but also you have a lot of those areas.
And we kind of decided, yeah, let's just
roll our own hit detection, a very, very simplified
dump-down detection for only these cases.
We only use circles.
We have, instead of the layer system,
we have a very simple string name-based filtering
where we can say, OK, the player is in one hit group,
the monsters are in the other hit group,
then there are a bunch of other things
that we want to filter.
And we also use a very simple grid for space partitioning
to make it a little bit faster.
And all of the collision between monsters or characters
and the environment are still handled with a good O2D physics,
like the monsters are bumping into each other
and are blocking each other still box 2D.
Then we had a lot of stuff that is very simple, very small,
and pop-up pops up for like half a second,
and then it disappears again.
So we have a lot of, for example, like these damage numbers.
They pop up for maximum a second and they get deleted.
So we figured out, why don't we just
put them into an object pool?
Because obviously, the reset of those small things
is faster than their initialization.
This only works for very simple entities
with that are very common and often.
They have a very low lifetime and a frequent appearance.
And their initialization takes like a few steps only.
And then you get a good gain from that, actually,
if you pull them.
And finally, we had a lot of stuff
that would have a process method implemented.
But the process, most of the time,
it wouldn't do anything in the process.
We would check at the start of the process method,
oh, is this visible or is there an active flag or something?
And if not, we just make an early return.
And this is actually not that good,
especially if you have a lot of those things.
So the best practice is to actually set the process mode
instead of checking a flag in process.
Because every process call has an overhead.
Like basically, every function call in GDScript
has a little overhead.
And you have lots of calls.
This little overhead adds up every frame.
And that basically applies to all methods.
So if you have an overhead for a lot of monsters,
for example, you have the movement code.
And the movement code is handled every frame in process.
We decided to say, OK, let's save on all those process calls,
even if they have to happen every frame.
And we take the body of the process
and put them into a global static loop.
And we loop over all the entities
and execute the code for those.
And that way you save a lot on the call for the process.
You can do this not only with process,
but with all kinds of methods.
Yeah, so these are the five biggest takeaways, I think.
There were a lot of more, we stumbled in curious cases,
which I didn't cover here.
But yeah.
And this is where my talk ends abruptly.
I hope I could give you some useful impulses.
And thank you for listening.
And if there are any questions, I open for it.
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
And also, one thing, if you have any questions,
just drop me a mail, and I'll try to answer if I can.
Yeah, thank you, Paul.
As I mentioned earlier, all those effects and entities
look really great and not only on the screen,
but also optimization-wise, it's really cool.
Yeah, we have time for two or three questions.
So if you have questions, raise your hands.
Of these four optimizations that you have shown,
which of them have helped?
How much do you have some rough numbers or ideas?
Unfortunately, I don't have any metrics.
We kind of went like--
the way you optimize this, you look for bottlenecks,
and then you see, OK, this is slow.
And then you kind of find a way to reduce the load there.
And you don't really look at numbers.
You kind of look at numbers.
You kind of look at execution time.
But those execution times are usually
dependent on your hardware.
So for us, it didn't make sense to track
them in a spreadsheet or something.
But the most impact actually was moving stuff to C++.
This is the best thing you can do a performance-wise.
That's why I always tell people, yeah, maybe consider
forking ago, though, and do your own stuff.
And learn about the engine.
Why not?
Hey, Paul.
Thank you for the great talk.
I'd like to know how you feel now about kind of this unity
centric architecture you came up with,
which has great decoupling, but then led to having
to optimize certain things.
Well, it did its job for a host of children.
And I've talked with Dominic about it.
And we realized we would probably make it a lot more
differently today than we did it back then.
It was really like our paradigm back then.
And we realized there are better ways to do it.
And actually, there was a time where
we considered making a sequel to the game right after we
released.
And Dominic also started prototyping
like a system that was much better suited for our needs.
But I would do it differently.
But it did its job pretty well.
And it still does.
So I don't want to downplay it too much.
Thanks.
Great talk.
Wanted to ask about the bonuses and kind of how they interact.
How does your system handle things
like additive and multiplicative bonuses
and potentially removing them and keeping track of the order?
Is that on every frame?
Or is it like calculated once when it changes, then apply it?
Or you talk about that.
So we only react to changes.
And we also had one rule that all additive bonuses
are applied first and then the multiplicative.
Like we didn't have like additive multiplicative.
And this would be much way way to complicate it,
even for the players.
So typically in ARPGs, this is the way
it's done like additive first, multiplicative.
And we always, as I said, only on changes.
And we cache certain things.
Like we cache every value in the game object.
The game object has a couple of caches of stuff
that's going on.
And at some point, Dominic even implemented
like a lookup table for damage because we
don't have non-deterministic damage.
So we decided, oh, why don't we just
save like check sums for certain modifier configurations
and put the damage number behind it?
And that actually, in some cases, that sped up the game.
And it worked.
So we did stuff like that as well.
Because we were desperate, we were also
optimizing for the switch.
And yeah.
Hey, great talk.
Thank you.
Thank you a lot.
You already touched upon it in the last sentence you
said about non-determinism.
But I would like to ask about the out-of-player
for performance testing.
Did you have some way of flocking in determinism in that case?
Like you looked at the FPS, but the game is still random.
So the outcome can still be vastly different.
Yeah, in terms of crashes and stability,
determinism, non-deterministic stuff
wasn't a big problem because we were running it very often
and very quickly and on multiple instances.
And what we had is like a playlist of stuff
that the out-of-player has to play.
So the out-of-player would select the character,
go into the game, maybe even create a random loadout,
and select certain abilities that we also
could pre-determine.
We had a configuration for those.
And the out-of-player would just move around
to key positions in the map and fight.
And this is all also random, because we have also
random real procedure generation in the levels.
So we just tried to cover it stohesically.
We didn't care about determinism in that case.
OK.
And thank you Paul for your talk, for your questions.
And if you have more questions, you'll still be here.
Yeah.
Talk to him.
Yeah.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
