API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/93402
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/godotfest2025-building-starfinder-professional-godot-at-scale
Title: Building Starfinder: Professional Godot at Scale

[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think it is safe to say that when it comes to small game
production, good rules already kind of a common choice,
especially if it comes to game gym games.
But what about large-scale productions?
Can Goro handle it already?
Well, the team at Epic Tellers is currently
working on Starfinder, a full-scale RPG
made in Goro with a team of 30 developers.
How good does it work?
What challenges arise?
Well, I think there's no one better
than the team of Epic Tellers themselves.
Please give a round of applause for Maria, Rick and Felix.
(audience applauds)
- Hello.
We did this presentation in like a week
because we are very busy, so sorry if it's a sloppy.
Just a star, so presenting myself
and the co-founder of Epic Tellers
and I also work on coding when I have some time.
Then with me is Felix, who will talk about narrative.
And then Maria, who is our awesome level designer.
So a bit of us before we move forward
to understand the context, that was us last year at go.con,
talking about demo that we did for CRPG,
the, we did it.
So how is this going? First to align ourselves in case I'm sure that I mean we
are very we just announced it two months ago so in case just to understand a bit
of the game that's the trailer.
For a while no offense. Can you make haste with that lock or is that fluffy
brains reputation yours just for show?
I've seen the end of light the cold night engulfing us all we're all dancing on
the planks end because nobody believes me because it has not happened yet you
won't let it happen help is on the way from the one looking for his courage to
the one who needs to believe in himself from the one dreaming of freedom to the
one who needs to face the truth from the family you didn't know you needed
they're ready to run get ready to strike to loot to love hard to fight to burn
the galaxy we are failing the last time
the problem that that we face is structurally
was that when we did four-bit of lands, we were eight people. So we rushed to it. As
Renee was saying, who, um, speed is everything when you are doing that. So what you do is
that coders are happy to work with Godot. They work very fast. So writers, for narrative,
they just send stuff to coders and coders make it happen. Same goes for artists, for designers,
for audio. And probably you are saying what happens, right? Um, so coders are stopping
productive. They start hitting each other. They start talking bad about the other disciplines.
They don't know how to do it. And that's, that's really not working. So we first needed
to untangle that. Uh, this is what we really want and, uh, how we, how we achieve that.
So the first problem is looking to the writers. How we made the writers work that equip with
Godot without anybody in the middle. For that, we built, uh, a tool called Loom that we will
talk more about in later. But basically it's the common thing of just branching narrative
tool, uh, with Godot. Um, for designers, we actually extended, uh, Loom and made some high
level logic work, um, also inside the, the Godot itself. So they don't need to hassle
programmers. They still hassle programmers, but way less. Um, for artists, well, um, it
turns out actually Godot 4 is evolving pretty fast. So our pipeline is, most of it is around
Blender and the pipeline from Blender to, to Godot. It needed some work, but it doesn't
need a lot of new stuff, new that, uh, things that were not there. Already, um, most of the
artists, especially technical artists, open Godot frequently and do things directly there.
Uh, for example, most of the artists, I think they built all the materials already in Godot,
if I remember correctly, right? Um, for audio, well, uh, do our audio guy, uh, we actually
search for other, for the solutions for audio and we decided to not take F mod or wise or
something else more complex. We felt or we feel that, that with Godot, uh, features,
we can already do it, uh, do what we want. So one of the things is that for sound effects,
what we do is that we build a code about detecting files. So I tell dova, hey, if you want this,
this character to say something when they cast this spell, drop that file here. Here
already knows how to make the resources for randomized sounds and everything, you just
put them there with the right name, with the, in the right folder and it will work. And
if it doesn't, he will hassle me, but that's, that's okay. And then he already directly
worked with, with interactive music and music that opens and closes different channels,
which is the new, the new things from Godot, which I think with this is why enough to do
a pretty good audio for the game. So result, great. Now we have, we could scale from seven
to 30. Everybody's working Godot and that created another problem is that now not the
coders are, are crazy. Godot is going nuts because, and that's not really Godot. It's
the repository. The build was broken quite often. I mean, we more or less take two care
of it, but there was so much stuff happening in the same day, in the same repository that
was difficult to keep stability and to keep everything in check. So, uh, my first approach,
I think is the approach that I've talking in most AAA is threaten them. Okay. So if you
break the build, there will be consequences. Um, that works a bit. I mean, I have to say
violence sometimes is the answer. Um, but, um, it doesn't work very well when you find
yourself breaking the build. I was, but sometimes they were looking, yeah, but great. It was
you. I'm possible. Well, it was because it's just the com, the, the, the build is, is growing
or the, the project is growing so complex with so many people putting in things there that
it's very easy to break it. Even if you know what you're doing, even if you are careful.
So it's clear that we start, we needed to, to come up with something even more complex
than that. Last year, we already talked about our pipeline for CD, uh, for continuous integration.
What we did is even expanded more. Um, I mean, that could be a full, uh, a full presentation
here, but I just want to say that very few simple things come a long way to stabilize
things. This one, for example, checks if files are too small or too big. Uh, that was
a reaction of an artist adding a 170 megabytes into the build. And that was like, what the
fuck is this? This should never happen again. So, uh, we have basically, we just check for
extensions and we said this is the maximum and the minimum because sometimes you think
you have a, uh, PNG that it's fine, but it's like 0.1, uh, or one kilowatt or something.
That must be something wrong. So you can already detect some stuff here. You can do that with
meshes, uh, too many triangles, too less, uh, broken meshes, things like this. Uh, you
can check for reference. We open every resource in text. We look for all the UIDs and we check
if that file actually exists. And if it doesn't, the pipeline will stop the build. You know
what I'm talking about? Most likely broken reference is one thing that it's very easy
to break. Textors that they need to in the right format, in the right folder. Um, we
even open every level, uh, in the pipeline and make sure it loads in less than 15 seconds.
And if not, we stop you there. Um, we even open the game and go through the menu, automatically
the main menu and then open the first level and check if there are memory leaks, there
are warnings, there are anything. Um, for example, this one, I'm very fond of, uh, of this one,
even if the rest of the team hated, uh, which is, they know it, um, which is, I probably
serve it very self-explanatory. Every file is checked against this, um, those, uh, those
searches. If you add a file in the file system that does not meet any of this criteria, you
don't pass the pipeline, you cannot merge the main. This allows that very, very well
extractor, uh, file them folder. And this comes from the old AAA tricks that we didn't
be comparing, so that we need to keep everything sane. Um, this made actually another problem.
Everything was very strict and sometimes you just want to open the build and try things.
You just want to, I don't know, see how something could work. So what we did is we created the
James folder where everybody creates a folder with their own name, and they just go there,
they can go crazy. Uh, pipeline doesn't care what, what you add there. Uh, but the moment
you move those things that you feel are good outside James, then the pipeline will check
everything. Uh, as an example of what happens when we upload the build, we trigger workers,
uh, through our GitLab, uh, process that this is, for example, one of the tests of the
feature test where, I mean, it's working very, uh, fast because we actually make the, the
timer of, of God go faster to spin that up, but it's starting the safe test, goes to safe
point, saves the game, go and finish it, and then loads the game and make sure that you
can move and go to the other side. Here we are indirectly testing 10 to 15 systems. Not
into the safe, but you can move, the animations are there, the characteristics is the load
in the level and so on. If anything that you do breaks this, you won't be able to check
in into me. Um, last tips that I wish I knew, um, one year ago, first, uh, we took a decision
when I start finder is that God is so small, really small, that when you recompile our
version, and I have to say, we don't do much on simple splash, we basically take most of
vanilla, um, God, we put the binaries into the repository, which is counterintuitive,
you know, one binary is in your repository, actually makes a lot of sense because when
we upgrade from Godot for, uh, for, for example, for that five, uh, it took one day, and then
on Monday, people just loads and the binary and the data is always in sync. You don't
have to tell people you need to download a new version and things like this. Also, having
Godot in the binary allows Godot itself, all the pipeline, everything that you guys saw
of checking measures and everything is doing Godot, uh, code it in Godot itself. So the
whole repository self-contained, you can download it anywhere and it will run and all
the pipeline can be executed in, in local because Godot runs the pipeline itself. We
used to do that with Python, we removed Python out of the, out of the equation and Godot
honestly is really like, uh, very easy to work with. So it's a very good substitute for
Python. Other thing that it's extremely simple and I, I was a bit embarrassed to say that
because maybe everybody tells me, every, every, we do that. It's worth you that you
miss the drop the ball here. We don't think of a scenes as levels all the time. We don't
think even a scenes as a way of building characters with, which we do, of course. So we think
of scenes as just data in a tree. Um, and that, that is a lot of data that makes sense to
make it in a tree. And this, for example, is our level manager that identifies which
levels are actual, which scenes are actually levels in the game. And, uh, it makes sense
that it is a tree. So the, the game, it sort of, it has an act one. It has different locations
and inside it has levels. So we represent this information in a scene. This scene is not related
to anything about, uh, about, um, a level, but it structures the, the, um, the information
very well, you have a very powerful tree editor in Godot itself. Use it for anything that
could be represented as a tree. Um, for example, quests are built old in a tree. This is, this
is not using much of the tree functionality, but those are the game states. And instead
of having a folder with tons of files that are organized in some specific, I don't know,
whatever folders are organized into what we have here is that those are the game states.
And when I need a game state, I know I open this scene and then I check for the game state
visually, I can navigate the functionality very fast. For example, we have a scene that
describes the whole systems of the camera. I just open there and I can see all the 20 bits
and come and functions that are the camera, but this is described in the scene because
it's just really a tree, a very powerful tree editor. Anything? That's it. We'll go to Felix.
Perfect. Thanks, Felix. Well, hello, my name is Felix and I'm a narrative designer at Epic
Tellers. And of course, I'm here to tell you a story. And it's the story of how we went on a quest
in the far land of Hispania looking for our narrative tool to fulfill all the long wish list that
the narrative designers at Epic Tellers began to build. And this started in that game that
Drake was telling you about in the game we show at go.com. During this, we learned a lot. We learned
that writing for CRPS is really complex. You have a lot of variables. Did you fight with a faction?
Did you became friends with them? Did you betray the only lady in the square, in the main square?
Everything amounts to changes in branching narrative. As you know, this can quickly become
very complex and very ugly, real fast. And we realized that with our friend, the spreadsheets.
You know, spreadsheets is they go to solution for games and for most games, it works. And for us,
it worked for a while. And it did a good job. Thanks, champs. Our friend champs know the story.
But very soon, there is so much that there is not much that a single row of spreadsheets can
contain. So somewhere in that process, we realized we need something else for our real game.
So it was okay, but we had a long, a long wish list. So we went there on this quest to find
the perfect, our weapon against this complexity. And of course, we went to the usual suspects.
We were, okay, we asked, what are the industry and standards to work? Of course, RTC, for example,
it's like you have RTC. Everything you need is there. It's big, it's complex, you have support,
you have integration. At the time, the integration with Godot was not a sure thing. But no, no,
we are working on it. Of course, Godot is in the horizon. So there's that. And so many actors like
our wave offer online solutions, web solutions. And then they were very enticing. They were like,
come, come here. And it was nice. We really liked them. So we were, after six months of trying
testing, we were almost on the verge of a decision. And RTC was kind of convincing. But
the thing that worried us the most was integration and sync. Like we need our main goal in narrative
for this project is fast iteration. We wanted to test things fast, correct, test again. And we were
worried that this process of integration would consume a lot of our time. And we had to deal with
integration problems and support. So when six months have passed, Rick told me, I remember clearly,
he told me, Felix, give me the weekend. I want to try something in Godot. And that was the beginning
of, that was, this was Rick and I talking about it. And after that very moving hook,
he told me this. And the solution is what we now know as Loom, the system that Rick was talking,
telling you about. Okay. And I'm going to show you how cool is working with this,
with this tool that we developed. And I say we develop writers with that,
appropriating the success of others. But the thing is, I'm going to show you how cool,
how is a normal day working with this tool and what are the benefits of that process.
And I'm going to do that asking for the help of one of the companions in our game. This is
Android, Lou, 323. And she's one of the main companions of the game. And I'm going to show you
a typical example of how we come to a level and start working on dialogues. When we come,
Maria is going to tell you about it. But when we come to work, we already have like a skeleton
of the level that we are going to work in. And we just get there in Godot and we start creating
dialogues. In this case, we're going to create a dialog for Loom, 323, in an event called
co-cauldron, co-cauldron. That's the name of a bar in our game. So I just create a Loom file.
A Loom file is just a text file. And so it's easy to do code to work with Git and do emerges,
resolving conflicts is easier. And every Loom file, every dialog, every narrative interaction,
starts with a Loom file and an entry point. This is kind of the universal identifier in Godot.
So any time we want to tell the system, okay, clicking on this NPC is going to start the dialog.
We do that, but Telling Godot, okay, this is the Loom file and inside that Loom file,
you're going to use that entry point. So it's very easy to have a Loom file with multiple entry
points. So in this case, for example, you can start the dialog with this companion from
in several different ways, each one of them with a different entry point. And it's very easy
for us writers to visualize what the interaction is about. If it's a complex flow, if it's chaotic,
if you see here connections like chaotic connections, you don't have to dig deeper and you can easily
realize, no, no, this dialog is kind of messy. So you can see like complex flows and see if the
flow, if the pacing of the dialog looks okay, just from looking at it, okay. And another benefit of
this of Loom is that every time we want to use or make reference to an element inside the game
inside Godot, it's as easy as locating the element on Godot and dragging and dropping. For example,
I want to specify that this speech dialog is Loom speaking. It's as easy as going
to our senses. Senses is basically the definition of a companion with all their skills,
with their picture, the name, and just dragging and dropping. And the same with every element,
like gamer tags, quests, whatever, it's as easy as dragging and dropping, okay.
And the cool, this cool graphic you are seeing there is a typical example of how Loom
or how the narrative team interacts with another subsystems of the game. We have created,
we, again, we, the devs have created custom notes, specialized notes that interact with
subsystems. For example, we see there we have your typical branching narrative. You are going to
offer the player choices, but those choices are conditioned by some events. For example,
here you see we have some special condition notes. One of them asks if that book,
that character with a book appearance is on our party. If that is so, we can provide the user with
a specific option. The same with inventory items. Do we have this item on our inventory? Okay,
offer the player this choice. We have notes for doing skill roles. What would be of CRP without
throwing dice? For example, this is a note that allows us to specify which of the characters is
doing the skill check, what is the attribute we are testing, the difficulty, and all the possible
outcomes. Critical success, success, fail, critical fail. That's very easy to create these
branches all alone. Of course, for example, game attacks. The game attacks are the persistent,
global scope variables that we use to define the progress in the game. It is easy for us at
any time to set game attacks or check game attacks. This is so quick, so fast for us and so simple
that our team, the people that don't have any experience at coding can easily build complex
logics and start prototyping dialogue and interactions in minutes. So it has proved the fact it has
been very important for our goal of fast iteration. And when we are working with that and talking
about fast iteration, the fact that we can play the game, we can test the game, we can see in real
time the flow moving, we can see the flow advancing, we can check the exact path we are taking,
and we can change in real time the content of the notes, change the options, change the skill
roles, and we don't have to restart the game at all. We just go and talk to the same character
again and the changes are reflected. So it is perfect for our, we have sessions of peer-to-peer
play testing in the narrative team, so we can see things. I don't like this. Let's try if this
sounds better. We can test test and the changes are already there where you will just have to
commit the change and it is as you see as that. Of course, we have more tools that I could be
showing you characteristics of loom, but for example, we have stats. We have, our game is going to be
voiced by actors like most of the dialogue, so we need to keep in check, for example, how many lines
of dialogue, how many words each one of the character has, because we have to schedule and
plan the voice acting recording sessions. So we have this, we can keep track of which character
is becoming expensive, so we can kill them. So that's mostly the decision come from this.
And of course, we can check all the pipeline errors ahead of time, and we can run this
validator, or we can double-click each error, it takes us to the exact node, so we can take action
and correct it. And it's very, very easy and it's very fast, but the most beneficial,
I think, feature of loom is how we can integrate with level design with Maria, for example. When
I work with Maria, it's very normal that we are working on different flows. We are working in our
dialogue flow, the narrative flow, and she's working on the, or the more logical flow of the
level. And sometimes, and most of the times, we interact. For example, in this case, it's the
typical dialogue where I know that after talking to Lu, the level is going to do something awesome,
the character and the party, they are going to try to break a crate. I don't know how she's going
to do that, I only know that they're going to try that. So, I can call another loom file
and a specific entry point, and I can expect results from that call, and I just need to know
if they succeeded at breaking the crate, or if they failed, and I can resume the dialogue flow
accordingly very easily. She can be working on that, I can be working on this, and we don't have
any conflicts. I can work in parallel. She can have a stop, meanwhile, and put something temporarily,
I can put temporary dialogues, and it's very easy, we don't have any kind of conflicts,
as we can work in parallel. No one has to wait for, and this jump is not only useful,
jumping between files, but it's the typical go-to, and I can make modular dialogue easier.
And the next logical question is, compared to the original six months of scouting and testing
software, how many months did it take, Rick? Because Rick is the father of Oslo,
how many months did it take, Rick, to develop loom to this level that we are currently using?
Exactly, two months. So if we compare that to the time that we spent trying software,
if we had done this, we would have saved four months, but the message here is that
you don't have to be afraid of trying to create, trying to use God God to fulfill the needs,
in this case, of narrative design, because it's very easy, and the results, as you can see,
are, for us, in part of what we wanted to use from RTC and ArcWeave. We are fulfilling
our full wish list of features, and it has been a really, really fast process.
And with that, let's use loom to jump to Maria. Maria.
Is this working? Yes. Thanks, Felix, for the introduction. I'm Maria, and I'm a level designer
in Epic Tellers, and I'm going to be talking about this subject from the perspective of our
department. If you've ever worked in video games, you may have seen that a level is a place where
everything comes together. So every department is going to throw their things and their work on it,
like gameplay, logic, the systems, the art, the dialogues, and everything is going to come together,
and you're just going to watch it and hope that it doesn't explode. The bigger the team, the bigger
the explosion. So I'm going to go over some of the ways that we have been using Godot to bypass
these danger points. This is the workflow that we use in level. I'm not going to go over it,
because we're not innovating here. You can watch GDC talks about this topic,
whatever you want. The important part is that we are constantly communicating with our department,
and we are constantly working very closely with all of them. So that's why I'm going pinpointing
some of the things that we've used to go over this smoothly. And so one of the important steps
is the block out. This is the most obvious step that level goes through, the actual making the level
in 3D. And we start this by having two inputs. We start working with concept, which gives us an
environmental idea of what the place is going to be. When you're designing for CRPGs, the cities in
the world are supposed to feel alive. So they have a lot of lore. You need to know who made them,
what's the climate there even. So the level is going to structurally reflect all of this. It's
important that we have this information before we start. And then we also work with narratives,
so they give us some objectives of what is going to happen in the level. Maybe this is a quest
about Romans. Maybe it's a Romans quest, so we're going to tone down the pacing of the level so that
maybe you have more opportunities to connect to your companions. This might be a level of a
character presentation. So we're going to structure the level to build that presentation up,
so it matches with the character of the companion and how we want the player to perceive them.
Once we have these two things, then we move on to the actual building of the level.
Here we're going to work really, really closely with 3D art because they are the experts in taking
a bife from a concept and then developing into an actual 3D space. So this, for example,
is a prison that we have in one of our levels, and we're supposed to communicate a series of things.
This is also a character presentation, so we need to take that into account. But for example,
we need some lore from the company that has this prison to be explained. So we're going to create
the spaces to make this possible. Working really closely with 3D art also gives us the challenge
of this smooth communication between both sides. To bypass that, we've been using Gridmap,
which is a tool that got it already has. It's basically a tile map. You have a preset of meshes,
of 3D meshes, and then you can just rearrange them however you want. This helps to build
modular levels very fast. We have adapted this, and we have granulated it, and now we have really,
really small pieces. This is why my teammates say that I spend my days just playing with LEGO,
because we have all these things. But the good thing about this is that we have taken this,
expanded it, and now when the art team receives these pieces, they can substitute it with final
art. This is really useful when you have to build many levels, and you want to have a common base
with 3D from which they can dress the level with. Another thing that we've been using for
working with 3D, especially, is nested scenes. Throughout the development of a level, we
probably reach to a point where the iteration is not going to be very significant. In that case,
it's beneficial that the 3D art team can come in and start making changes, but we don't want to
have any conflicts. What we do is we create the little corner of 3D art, which is that
beautification node, and it works wonderfully, because they can be doing advances in this other
scene. The changes that they do will be reflected in my level, and then when we merge everything,
it's not going to register as a change, so we won't have any merge conflicts, and this is ideal.
Another tricky step in our pipeline for level design is the actual event design and
the scripting of these levels. We work really closely with narrative. They might give us a quest,
like, for example, the prison that I was talking about before. They might say we have to infiltrate
a prison and rescue this character that is going to be your companion. So we take this information,
and then we lower it to actual level logic. So if I'm working with us here at BG, I'm going to say
that all problems should be solved in three or four ways. That would be a sweet spot. So I'm going
to say maybe the player can steal a key from a guard and get in. Or maybe the player can charm
the receptionist of the prison to get in as well. Or maybe they just want to kill everybody and
get in by force. That's fine, too. We take these steps and we lower them to this kind of workflow,
and then we script them, and we script them in LUM as well. This has worked really, really well,
because sharing the same platform with another team makes it really easy to understand each other.
They understand what we're doing in level. We understand what they're doing in narrative.
We, it's not like we're scripting, and it's a very foreign tool that they are not accustomed with.
So this proves well, and then we have the end product, which is the experience that the player
actually gets. The interaction with whatever logic behind it that there is.
So why did we decide to use LUM for scripting? We started working with JavaScript, but we do
have a diverse level team. We have somebody who is more art-oriented, somebody who is a bit more
combat and gameplay-oriented, one of those guys who really likes to spreadsheets and balancing,
and then me, who is a bit more narrative-oriented. This is really good for making levels, because we
have all the three perspectives. But this means that we had different coding abilities. So we
wanted something a bit easier to get into, like a visual scripting language. We started trying
out things like Orchestrator, which is a plugin for Godot, but around the same time that we're
trying these things out, LUM had been developed for narrative. And we just thought,
I think Drake has too much free time. I think we can also expand this system to work for us.
And also, if we have any problem, we can go on knowing him directly, and we don't have to work
with a third party. So we did this, and it has been working really, really well. We knew that we
didn't want to have a full visual scripting language. We can't make functions, we can't make
variables like arrays. But this is a conscious design decision, so that we can have a lot of
freedom, but also we can still keep it simple. And as I said, relate to the people in Artifto,
we work with very, very closely. This way, we ended up with a system that works in a way that
a coder might develop, will develop a system. Like, for example, those are the files for the
Quest system, which Lucha right there developed. And that's maybe like two months of development.
That's a lot of time. But then we'll sit down between the two departments, and we will find the
way to translate this complex system into a series of LUM nodes that you can use easily.
And the creation of LUM nodes is really, really fast. The system is put in place so that
the code is fast to make your only referring to the actual system that's already created.
And we can contain this system into, let's say, five nodes. We can close the Quest, we can open one,
we can make some of the Quest relate to each other. So if one opens, another one will open as well.
So this has been allowing us to work between the two departments and understand the systems that
we're working with really, really well. Last thing about the scene inheritance that I
wanted to talk about our building level is a scene inheritance that we've been implementing
since the beginning. This is the way that we structure all of our levels. You may have a lot
of items and a lot of objects are of entity senior levels. And we wanted to make sure,
because we're developing the technology at the same time that we're making content for the game,
we wanted to make sure that iteration would be fast. So we just take all of the objects that
we're going to have and we categorize them into different groups. As an example, we may have
everything in a CRPG that we're working with is interactable. So we're going to make an
interactable template that has the base of everything, maybe a mesh, an area of effect,
whatever. And then we're going to make children of this template and make more templates.
So we'll have, for example, a loot template. From this loot template, we can make a bunch
of different types of loot templates. So it just goes on and on and on. But the good thing about
this is that if at any point any of the logic of the interactable of how it works changes,
we can just go to the parent template and all of the changes made there will just cascade
down to everything else and we don't have to touch anything, the levels update automatically.
So that's another thing that we've been using a lot.
To wrap the presentation up, I thought it was important to mention that one of the strongest
points that Godot has, it doesn't matter if you're a big team or small team for developing a game
and developing too specifically for your company, is the fact that there's a huge community backing
you up. I remember, I'll talk about grid map before. When I started working with grid map,
it didn't have all the functionality that I needed. So I decided to make an add-on.
But I'm not a really good programmer. So I decided to go to the community and ask. And this was my
first time actually engaging with an open source community of an engine. And I put this issue up,
and the next day it had been labeled, but somebody had linked other relevant issues about it and
it had been registered into the information that you have here. So now my tool is actually deprecated
because they implemented all of these things. And the next version of Godot, this is solved
much better than I could have ever done. So I think that this is an important part of why choosing
Godot to do something like this. And we came all the way here in part to thank you for having
our backs. So we can actually develop these things very fast and with this community backing us up.
Thank you very much. You have any questions? You can go ahead.
Yes, thank you very much. We still have some time for some questions. So if you have questions,
raise your hands. Hi, congratulations for the amazing work you've been doing so far.
I have a question about deciding how to implement tools. I do that myself, of course,
when I develop my own projects. But it's always a hard balance to decide how much time to spend
on a tool and how much time it will be better just to stick to whatever we already have.
But in this case, I can totally see the outcome that you've got implementing Loom.
I don't know if you have a process to decide which kind of tool to implement if you have
some sort of decision making process. When they stop asking for new features, probably is the
time that you are there. They never stop asking new features. So at some point, you need to
focus on something else. I do not know, because actually our structure is a bit odd for a Godot project.
We work in a very long term as a company, which is pretty big, again, is not an indie. We grow,
we have a lot of expense, and we need to work on our toolset that we can rely. And if we get
add-ons, external add-ons, and that person stops developing it, it creates a problem. So it's
better to create our own things and think on the long term. We are not thinking about if this is
going to be useful for this first game. We are thinking if this is going to be useful in the next
10 years. We don't try to make systems that will be bulletproof in 10 years. That's not my point,
because that's bad. Don't do that. But in general, it pays off a lot, because the bigger the team,
the bigger you are accelerating everything. The moment we did, for example, validating for Loom,
Loom is used in logic, is used in narrative. We are using it now for AI. The moment you do
validating, suddenly 10, 15 people are affected, and they are faster. So it's very difficult to say
no to those improvements. Sometimes there are improvements that are very local that will affect
one or two people, and then you put them in the balance. But the thing is that it's very difficult
to say no, because Godot is so fast. Validating and everything, the validator it took
two days, I think, to build. It's just so fast that it is ridiculous, the iteration time.
The whole presentation is you could be some less, do your own tools, it's so fast, it's ridiculous.
That's it.
Hi, thanks for the awesome presentation. I have two questions. You presented what seems
like a very strict framework for the folder and file structure where you have all the validations.
My question is, when you decide how to change it and how big the changes can be,
because it seems very strict and strict things are hard to change. More importantly,
how long does it take for the GitHub pipeline to run and finish?
This guy knows this. Yeah. In Epic Tellers, we have a very flat structure.
This file there is basically for anybody to change. What happens is normally, you get, like,
for example, a newcomer arrives into Epic Tellers and they do something cool, and we are all looking
at him. It's like, you still have a mandate pipeline. You'll see. And then it's like, yeah,
I have this new thing that you press, go to the pipeline. Why you cannot check in my changes?
Well, you have 10 things wrong. Why you have that? Go one by one and you might learn.
And at some point it's like, why you cannot put this file here? And if there is an easy
answer to that, it's like, because this file doesn't go here, this goes here, and the name
should be like that, it's naked, and so on. Then that's fine. But sometimes it's like,
actually, that's a good point. Probably shouldn't be go here. Go to this file that I just copy pasted
here, and add the new metric to do it. You do it yourself. It's actually a file in the same
repository. So it's self-contained. The moment you do the checking, the pipeline goes. How the
pipeline goes, it depends on how many people are trying to put things in. So the week before
a deadline or something, it becomes a slower. I wouldn't say we did some improvements. I don't
know. You guys have me here. It's like, with eight minutes? Eight, ten minutes, probably.
Sometimes it can go faster. But we do lots of things like compile all the scripts,
link all scripts. It can take a long time sometimes. This is basically all three computers that are
in the home base of the parents of one of the developers. We just put it there. With a message,
please do not turn off. So it's not an expensive setup. Anybody can do it.
It looks like you guys had a really big win with developing the Loom tooling. Is that something
that you plan on releasing publicly available in the future?
The idea for the whole start finder thing is going to be, we want it to be very moddable.
So we want a lot of mods. We want to open it. We still need to find out exactly how. But if you
need to mod it, it means that you need to access it in order to do quests. So there will be some sort
of access to it. Honestly, inside the team, we don't care much. It's more about the legal trouble
than anything. We don't want somebody to just copy everything and publish it in a team like
we have a Pathfinder. Suddenly, I have to have a legal battle against some clones. As long as we
can solve that, most likely this will be publicly available. The thing is that we don't have it,
we don't code it to be generic. We code it for our needs. That are pretty generic and probably
can be used. But it's not in that situation. But I have to say, in the way we work, we do lots of
add-ons. The add-on idea and structure is very useful. I don't know how many we have. Maybe 20,
30 add-ons to increase the tool set of Godot and loom is one. And then we have another area of code,
which is systems for the game that can talk. But the add-ons are self-contained. So the
idea is that yes, you could use it, but it probably will take some time.
Hello. My name is Ed Nigo Montoya, prepare to answer another question about the built pipeline.
The question is, you mentioned that your whole thing is built in Godot, but I'm not sure if you
mentioned whether it's built in GDScript specifically. And therefore, the question extends into, is your
whole pipeline, all the tests and everything written in GDScript? Everything. It's a GDScript
that calls an OS execute Godot. So it's Godot calling Godot execute tables.
We don't even use Bash or any other scripting. I work in Linux. I used to do all the script in
there. But at some point, it's like, I want this self-contained. So somebody with Windows,
somebody with Linux can do it. So Godot is actually the answer. You have the binary there.
It's like 10 problems in a row, just having everything by itself. Self-contained.
Yeah. Unfortunately, our time is now up. And yeah, we have to get out of here sometime soon.
But thank you for the team of Epic channel for Maria, Rick and Felix for your presentation.
[Applause]
