API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/35193
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/c4.openchaos.2019.04.the-35c3-ctf-nokia-phone-challenge
Title: The 35C3 CTF Nokia phone challenge

I'm really glad to have Andy here today, and he is talking about the last "Captural
Flack Challenge" from the last "Cals Communication" Congress.
So we've known each other quite long, so we visit the Congress together like every year,
and you're normally there doing some CTF, and I'm only there to talk and drink.
But you're doing some really cool stuff there.
And this year we talked a lot about your CTF challenge, where you built a nice challenge
around mobile phones, and especially quite new ones.
So it was pretty awesome, and I guess it would be a very, very nice presentation today,
having you here, Andy, and telling everything about the CTF challenge.
So yeah, give some big hands for Andy, please.
Thank you.
Okay, first a few words about me.
Who am I?
I'm Andy.
When I'm not doing stuff at night, hacking stuff, I am a security researcher at Rapid7.
We're doing, in the research team, we're doing internet scanning/zero internet scanning,
and I am doing mostly honeypot research there.
You can reach me on Twitter or on IRC, usually.
I am part of the CTF team called Eat Sleep Pone Repeat, or ESPR in short.
We are one of the biggest German CTF teams, three teams fusion after some time, and yeah,
we have been responsible for the C3 CTF of the past few years.
We've always been doing this, I don't know, I think six years by now, with different,
with different, under different names like Strato Mohur, or whatever there is CCCAC in
the beginning, and yeah, the talk is going to be about my challenge that I did, a two-stage
challenge based around GSM stuff.
During the CTF, so when I developed this, I made a video as a progress report to the
other team members, and I tweeted this during the C3 CTF, and that thing went viral.
That thing went more or less viral, because it looked like that.
What you can see in the back is all my development debug consoles and all that stuff, the different
programs running, the base station running, and all that stuff, and the window you can
see in the middle is what I built, and it looks like a Nokia phone, but it really isn't.
I built this thing completely by myself, and it's even able to talk to real phones over
a GSM network.
That is just to show off, I can show that later working actually, and explain you how I did
that, but the phone itself is more or less GSM compliant.
The only feature it has is it can send and receive SMS and log on to a network.
That's it, but that was enough work already.
The story behind that is, well, that looks great, me.
What is it doing?
As I said, I always wanted to build a GSM challenge.
The problems I had was I didn't know shit about GSM.
Of course, I played around with it, because they were open source tools available, but
I didn't really know anything about the inner workings of it, like how is an SMS sent from
a GSM base station, sure, and it worked, but as soon as I encountered some kind of problem,
I was just not able to properly debug it because I didn't know enough about it.
Also as I said, the inner protocol is no idea about that.
The C3CTF has the problem that remote teams need to be able to participate.
Teams all around the world want to play, and I cannot just set up a GSM network using RF,
because then it would only be locally available, and there are regulatory problems, because
I would need a license for that and all that kind of stuff.
Then the question is, what should I implement?
I can't build everything from scratch.
I can't build a base station and a baseband and the UI and everything from scratch.
In the beginning, in the 31st, the C3, I built a similar challenge, which already used the
UI code that I wrote, but that was much simpler.
This is a video from the Polish Dragon Sector team, where you can see the thing booting.
What that was is you log on by your telnet, and then you see a text UI that resembles
a Nokia phone.
This is actually the exploit already.
It looks like a Nokia phone.
There was a bug.
This is the SMS editor.
You can see that there is some text being written there.
The bug there was that you could fill up the SMS space with 160 characters, and then you
can add a template, and add additional 160 characters into that buffer, which would overflow
the buffer, and you would exploit this.
What you can see here, this garbage that shows up on the screen is the shellcode that
is being written into that buffer, which contains the exploit, essentially.
You get a shell.
There is a small command prompt in the bottom, and there's the shell.
This was the first iteration of that challenge.
And now it's back to weirdness again.
Yeah.
This thing didn't have a real baseband.
It didn't do any GSM stuff.
There were two CPUs in a virtual environment.
The first one running the UI using the telnet ASCII art interface, and the second one was
the baseband, which was really a baseband, which was just some film we're running, and
the UI talked to this over some shared memory interface, and you could send SMS and the
SMS would be printed on a SQL port, that's it.
And then I found Osmocom and Virtual UM.
Osmocom is a project, I think it stands for open source mobile communications.
I'd better start it that years ago when he reverse engineered a GSM base station, and
out of that effort, he founded a company, and he's doing all kinds of open source GSM
stack and UNTS stack work there.
Virtual UM is the solution for our RF problem.
These people need to do unit tests.
And because they can't for every unit test spin up a real base station, they replace
the RF layer with UDP multicast traffic.
So instead of sending traffic over an RF interface, it's being sent over UDP multicast traffic
in one direction, and the base station would send it to the phone, like broadcast it to
all the participants in the network, and the phones would broadcast everything over a multicast
channel back to the base station for the other direction.
This is a block diagram of a typical Osmocom based phone network containing GSM and UMTS.
On the right side, you can see the core network.
We don't really need to care about this.
It contains the mobile switching center, which is all the call rooting.
It contains the Osmo HLR, which saves the subscriber data like the crypto keys and your
identity, your phone numbers.
So if you log in, the network knows who you are.
And on the left side, usually the core network just exists once per network provider.
There is, of course, some redundancy if the HLR would break, then you wouldn't have any
possibility to log on to the network anymore.
So that's there multiple times, but it's one big entity in general.
And then on the left side, you have the radio access network, and this is usually there
multiple times.
The lower blue box, the H node B is for UMTS.
We don't need to care about that because we are not using any UMTS.
Then there is the Osmo H node B gateway that's the interface from the UMTS base station,
which is the H node B to the core network.
And then on the top, there is Osmo BTS.
BTS stands for base transceiver station.
This is what does all the RF.
This is what you mount on a cell phone tower and attach a tenorster.
And then there is the Osmo BSC, which is the base station controller.
And this is kind of like the zookeeper for all of the base transceiver stations you have
because you might have multiple of them on a radio pole.
And that's where the word cell comes from.
Every cell or multiple cells even are controlled by the base station controller.
And all of this stuff is available in open source.
You can just download it, compile it.
There are even devian packages by now, so you can just install it if you have the right
hardware and devian-based Linux system.
This is what I'm usually using.
If I'm using real phones with my GSM network, I set one up here in this small arm box.
It's just an old ride that I had lying around.
It doesn't even need to be that powerful to it.
Because I don't have a GSM base station at home, people came up with nice ideas just
to use software to find radios.
I have one here.
This is a Lyme SDR.
It looks pretty normal.
I just built a black box around it because it just comes as a PCB.
So you have the Lyme SDR on the left.
And as a bridge between the base transceiver station and the software defined radio, you
have something that's called Osmo TRX.
TRX stands for transceiver.
This is what takes GSM radio bursts, like small traffic packets essentially modulates
them so that you can send it over in antenna and communicates with a software defined radio
to transmit this over the year.
And then there are phones like old-school Nokia 3310, 3330, whatever.
Or special ones like the Motorola one you have here.
I also brought one on eBay, which is nice because on this one you can run an alternative
the firmware with an open source phone stack, and also made by the Osmo Comp people.
And that's how you would build a GSM network at home.
You just need to be a bit careful where you're transmitting and don't make it leave the room
because you would disturb other people.
And it's illegal usually to transmit on these bands.
Yeah, in the case of the challenge, we are replacing that whole radio infrastructure
with a GSM tab multicast thing.
The cloud I drew in there in that diagram is just some random network.
It might be a VPN, it might be just some local network, whatever.
And then there is this work-fi thing which replaces the RF layer and uses UDP multicast
to transmit traffic around.
And then you can attach Osmo Comp Bb again and then you have a phone on the network.
Of course you can't use real phones because they do RF.
You can't tell them to transmit UDP multicast, so you need to have a custom solution for that.
But for unit tests, that's fine because you need to control all the different components
anyway.
And you would write your test case some way, control Osmo Comp Bb, run your test cases and
then observe log output crashes, whatever your unit testing involves.
You can also combine these two just by starting a second base transceiver station.
So you have one doing the UDP multicast stuff, you add a second one, you tell the base station
controller, hey, you are now controlling two base transceiver stations.
And then you would add the second one which talks to the software defined radio and the
first one which does the UDP multicast stuff, which I also set up here so I can show that
in a minute.
Okay, so we solved the first two problems.
I know stuff about GSM now because I had to set up everything and I can look at that stuff.
Wireshark has some nice detectors for that UDP multicast thing.
It's called GSMTap.
That's the equivalent to radio tap headers if you ever sniffed Wi-Fi.
In monitor mode on Linux, you get the Wi-Fi packets encapsulated in something called radio
tap which contains meta information like what network it belongs to, what was the signal
strength of that packet, all that kind of stuff.
And GSMTap is equivalent because the problem, it contains different metadata because GSM
is time slot based and there are no source and destination addresses like in TCP/IP.
And the source and destination of a packet or burst called in GSM is implicit by the
time when it was sent.
Okay, so what should I implement and I can't build everything from scratch.
I still have the UI code, so it was clear that I wanted to build a phone because the
GSM network, usually if you're a hacker and you want to attack some targets, you would
want to attack a phone.
I already have the UI code from 31C3, so I figured I would just use that.
I can edit SMS already, so I can edit them, send them, receive them, all that kind of
stuff is there.
I then added FBDef graphics instead of the telnet ASCII art thing.
I just added FBDef graphics and libSDL for my local development efforts because it was
easier just to have a small window with a UI in.
And then the idea was to run this on an ARM CPU because traditionally phones are ARM-based.
Even these Nokia phones, by the way, are ARM 7-based.
Big endian, by the way, it's weird but that's the case.
Okay, so we can use QAML for that.
And I took QAML and added my own hardware platform because I needed to screen the default
platform on QAML didn't have a screen, so I looked around and I thought I'd just use
the screens, the Nokia phones use as well because funnily enough, the Linux has a driver
for these.
There is a subsystem called TinyFB or something like that that's used for, I think it's still
in the staging area, but it works.
There are multiple backend drivers implemented for these small displays that you would hook
up to Raspberry Pi or whatever else and these things are used by makers a lot.
If they use a display, it's just an SPI interface, you can hook it up.
If you have an SPI controller somewhere on some microcontroller or an application controller,
you hook it up, you configure the kernel correctly and you have a small console actually on these
displays.
So I implemented a QAML backend for the display because QAML didn't support that, attached
to the SPI interface, configured the kernel correctly and I had a frame buffer console,
which is the reason why I implemented the FB dev backend because that communicates with
the frame buffer console and you can draw pretty pictures on there.
How do we let remote teams participate?
I just traded an open VPN network so you could just log into an open VPN tunnel and you have
access to the BTS because it's just IP traffic after all.
Okay, the baseband, that's a problem because basebands are complicated, but there is Osmocumbie
B for these small Motorola phones.
The problem with Osmocumbie B is it's not a phone.
It behaves like a phone partly, but it's not a phone, it's a research tool and it doesn't
have any kind of UI graphical user interface, it just has a remote text interface, which
by the way is modeled after the Cisco VTY interface where you have to enter enable and
so on, you will see that later.
So I somehow had to take this thing apart and remove all of the debug stuff that you
would use that usually for, all the text UI interfaces and so on and I removed all of
that, at least the code is somewhat layered.
The goal was never to create a phone, so I had to somehow make this work and I'm very
sorry to the Osmocumbie people, but I completely bullshit this thing.
The code is not very, very nice because I built this thing in the course of four to five
weeks and I also ran somewhat out of time as usual, so initially I also wanted to make
phone calls work, unfortunately the UDP layer doesn't support traffic channels where the
voice would go over, so I removed that in the end.
So I ripped out the complete call support in Osmocumbie.
And also I needed to rely on ready-made stuff because the CTF goes over the course of 48
hours and I can't expect teams to completely reverse engineer at GSM stack in that time
span.
They are perfectly capable to do that, but not in 48 hours.
And to do that, I split the UI and the baseband into two different processes and made these
things talk to each other over a unique circuit.
So you have one process for the baseband, which then over another socket talks to the
lowest GSM layer, which does the UDP stuff, and then you have another socket from the
baseband to the UI where UI events go over.
For example, hey, you received an SMS.
Here is the raw SMS payload and then the UI parses this, writes it into SQLite database
because it was the convenient thing to do.
And it shows on the screen that you received a new SMS.
Same goes for network events.
You've got network connectivity or you lost network connectivity stuff like that.
As I said, I bought your OsmocomBB, removed the call support, the CLI support, added the
socket interface, tight UI events to it.
There was already something they called primitives because they have a Lua scripting interface
there which you can use to write scripts to send bulk SMS and so on.
For example, if you have been to a congress and you were on the GSM network, you might
have gotten some SMS involuntarily, I would guess that people used exactly that stuff
for it.
You can also do this with Nokia phones, but that is just to write some Lua scripts.
And these primitives, they used for this were somewhat usable for that socket interface
as well.
Essentially, I'm just passing around union structs for every event.
I have a struct in a union and then a type in the front which says, okay, this event is
an SMS.
This event is a network event.
This is, I don't know, a shutdown request for the software to exit all that kind of stuff.
And I got a phone.
It was a lot of work.
I got all of this, as I said, three, four, five weeks on and off.
I had to work during the day and I had a bunch of sleepless nights before Christmas.
On the journey to the C3, I added the box and started writing the exploits.
On day zero, I built the rock chain for the shell codes together with Nicholas.
And on day one, I deployed everything on our infrastructure because we had some servers
where the challenges are supposed to be run.
And I had to, so that not everybody was able to start GSM based stations because every
team which wanted to play needed their own GSM based station, we needed some infrastructure
where you click on a button, it would start a GSM based station or add you into a queue
if enough base stations were running already because we don't have unlimited resources
to run that stuff.
But at the end of, or during day one, everything was deployed and the CTF started on day one,
so it wasn't too bad.
Okay, so problem solved.
Everything ready?
Now I also needed a SIM card.
I had the phone but I didn't have the SIM card.
I looked around and I didn't find any kind of open source SIM card implementations.
I decided to implement my own one in another process and it implements the real APD use
for communication.
And APD use is just a byte string that goes to a smart card or comes from a smart card.
This interface is standardized and every smart card, your banking card, whatever card
implements this APD interface and on top of that you have an application layer with different
messages that implement different things.
And all of that for GSM is standardized in GSM 11.11, that's the specification you can
download on the Etsy website and I implemented almost all of the necessary functions.
So now there is an open source SIM card if you would like to call it that way.
The banking store for the SIM card, the SIM card implements a file system, I have some
slides for that as well.
It's just a JSON file because I needed to be able to edit this and it was just convenient
to just use a small JSON C parser and use that as a banking store.
APD use look like that, the green boxes are a byte or multiple bytes and the first, this
is just a byte string that you would send to a smart card.
CLA stands for class, that's where magic value is in if you want to talk according to the
GSM 11.11 standard, INS is the instruction, that's the upcode basically, P1 and P2 are
parameters for that instruction, P3 is a bit weird because it's as far as I understand
it, I'm not sure I did this completely right, is either a length of the payload that you
attach to that APDU or a length of an answer that you expect back from the SIM card.
In total there are five cases with different encodings available in different length with
the fields either are the length of the sent data or the expected data and I think I implemented
two of them, maybe three and I'm not sure if they are correct but it worked good enough
for us to be for the GSM stack to talk to the SIM card so I didn't care.
The response that you get back from a SIM card is payload optionally and then two status
words that tell you did the operation succeed, did it fail, what was the error code and so
on.
The different instructions that USM 11.11 specifies are select, you can select the file
on a SIM card by a 16-bit integer, you can get a status response which tells you which
file is currently selected, what are the access permissions, how much free space you
still have on the SIM card, all that kind of stuff.
Then there is read and update binary, that's just for a binary file you can read and update
the file, you can read, update, seek or increase record files, there are sequential files,
for example if you think about SMS you can store 10 SMS on your phone, then this would
with seek you would address the record that you, the record number that you would like
to read, write or update, increase is I think just setting a pointer to the next entry and
yeah, there are also, there's also a third file type that I didn't implement because
I didn't need it, I forgot what that was.
And then there is a verified change enabled disabled and unlock CHV, CHV stands for can't
hold our verifications, this is what usually is known as a pin, you can verify it, that's
basically entering the pin, you can change it, you can enable or disable it and you can
unblock it, unblock is if you enter the pin three times wrong, then you need to unblock
it with that PUK or whatever it is called in CHV speak, yeah and then there are a few
special ones run the GSM algo that's for generating crypto session keys because the crypto key
that you're using on GSM is stored securely stored on the SIM card, you can't extract
it, but you can generate session keys, every time you do a call, an encrypted call or do
some encrypted transaction, you run the GSM algo not every time, but nowadays the specification
is open, providers were able to not run this every time and reuse the session key because
the SIM card expires after a while, you can only run this crypto operation for a certain
amount of times and providers wanted to save, well, some cards essentially because if that
is depleted that amount of times you can run the algorithms, then you would need a new SIM
card due to security problems, by now they should request a new session key for every
single transaction they are doing, I don't know if they really do this but I think they
do, sleep just sleeps, that's some smart card thing and get response is special because
if you look at the APU as far as I understand it, if you send data with a payload, you set
P3 to the data to the data of the length of the payload and then the SIM card, the smart
card doesn't know how much data to send back, so what it does is it replies just with SW1
and SW2 I think and SW1 contains, yeah, everything's fine and SW2 contains the length of data
that you can then fetch using the get response and then you would issue another APU with
the get response instruction and P3 would contain the length that you would like to
read from the previous request to this smart card, at least that's how I implemented it,
I don't know if that's correct but yeah it works, this is what the file structure looks
like on a SIM card, the files don't really have names, they just have, they have names
for human readability but they're not saved on a SIM card as far as I know, you have a
master file that's just file name OX3F00 and then you have this tree structure where you
can save the ICC ID for example that's an elementary file, it's just a binary file that
you can read or write and this contains the card ID and then there is a directory file
called telecom for example you can save stuff like the SMS center address or I don't know
call counters your phone number, that's mostly for informational purpose I think and then
there is the GSM directory which contains stuff for the network, this contains what
is your home network, what is your emcee, your subscriber identification, all that kind
of stuff and what I implemented for example I think that's the least minimum that you
need is the ICC ID, then the GSM subfolder, then the last used location, the phone saves
which cell it used last where it logged in so that the network search if you turn it
on is faster because it looks up that file, tries to find that cell on the network and
tries to log on and if you are for example a different country that would work so your
network search would kick in the full blown network search which could take a few minutes
because it then needs to scan all the bands and find the new cells and all that kind of
okay see for example is the current session key for the crypto, PLM, PLM and cell is the
home network and HPLM and specify some search interval for new cells if you're onto a cell
I think if you're traveling around that specifies a timeout every n minutes or seconds it starts
a scan and tries to find better cells that have stronger reception, the SIM card looks
like this in the JSON, it's just a big JSON block here, it's just a big JSON object files
the master file table, the file type, all the constants that you see here for the example
the file type and the name and all of that stuff is according to the specification it's
just decimal because JSON doesn't support hexadecimal, then you have the MC file that's
file name, decimal, 28,423, file type 4 means it's an elementary file, file type 2 means
it's a directory file, file type 1 means it's a master file and then you have the values
that the size and the values in there, if that thing is valid, access conditions, we
will see that later, what that means under which circumstances are you allowed to perform
certain operations on the file, you may need to authenticate first and these are all the
different files, the location file where it stores the last locked-in location, the session
key, all that kind of stuff.
Yeah, CHVs, that's specified in the JSON file below as part of the meta information
for example, you can see the pin 1 is 1, 2, 3, 4 in this case, you have three remaining
tries, it's enabled and if you are correct, we set the remaining counter to three and
for the un-block CHVs, that's the PUK, if you enter the CHV 1 or 2 three times wrong,
then you would need to un-block that CHV using 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and you have 10 tries
for that, if you mess that up, then your card is blocked forever and you can throw it away,
that's the theory at least, NKI is the secret crypto key that would be used during a run
GSM algo, it gets a challenge response, I think a nonce and all that kind of stuff and then
a5 comp 128 V, whatever algorithm runs on the SIM card and generates the session key which
is then saved in that KC file here, yeah, card holder verification as I said is the pin,
if CHV 1 is enabled, the SIM is locked after reset and every transaction, if you would
like to redefine it, it's blocked, you need to enter CHV 1 and then you would do the
verify CHV 1 and you gain more privileges and the standard access levels for file operations
are either CHV 1, CHV 2, ADM which stands for Administration, it's a special one, if you
provision SIM cards for example, or always which is without any kind of authentication.
Okay, so we got a phone now, the environment that I gave to the teams looked like this,
we have the QAMU and in that QAMU we have that FB dev device which is responsible for
key input and the screen and we have the networking layer which is just open VPN which gets started
and you get access to the base station UDP multicast network.
In between, in the middle we have the baseband, the baseband communicates or something that's
called trust zone interface with the SIM card because the SIM card lives in a trust zone
environment, what this is, I'll have a slide later, then there is a socket for the UI and
the baseband to talk to each other and the socket for layer 1, the GSM layer 1 and the
baseband to talk to each other.
The phone, okay now starts the fun part, this, as I said, this is my GSM base station, if
I plug this in here, I can start it.
Disclaimer, this RF doesn't leave the room, I checked before.
So now I started the transceiver, the transceiver talks to the core network now and if I turn
on this phone it should get a network.
This is the, the upper one is the, is the thing that talks to the software defined radio,
so that was the first GSM base transceiver station which uses the SDRs now, is now online
and this phone should work.
Now on the bottom terminal, I am going to start the virtual, oh I'm way too close to
the radio, it's clipping, on the bottom terminal I can start the virtual, the virtual BTS,
that's running as well and I should see multicast traffic.
If I now go into my development environment for the phone, I just compiled everything
to run on my x86 notebook, that's how I mainly developed this stuff.
I can just start layer 1, I can start the baseband, I can start the sim card and I can
start the UI and then you see the phone that starts up, I enter the pin and now you can
see a bunch of messages flowing around and it already has a network.
On the top left side you can see the GSM bursts that are sent using UDP multicast, on the
top right you see stuff that's going on in the baseband, on the higher protocol layers,
on the top left I see some debug output from the sim card, you can see that for example
I'm getting APDUs, I'm replying to them and so on, on the top right, on the bottom right
you can see some debug output of the UI.
Now this is what the thing looks like, it resembles a phone of famous manufacturer back
in the 90s.
The only thing it can do is send and receive messages and you have the phone book.
If I were to write a message now, so this phone has a phone number 1004, if I send an
SMS to 1004, this is what you saw on the earlier video, we should receive a message
shortly on this phone.
I can also reply, of course, because why not.
This thing doesn't have T9 by the way, it's a bit cumbersome.
The phone number 999, I'm sending it now, you should see some traffic showing up there
soon, ah yeah, there we go, and we received a message and I can also read it and it says
Hi C4, yeah, okay, that was essentially only to show off, I'm just going to stop everything
and just to be sure, we move the plug, okay, okay, so I got the phone, now where would
I add bugs, the phone is only reachable via GSM, that was part of the challenge.
You don't have a user interface, you have nothing, you have, and I gave the teams an
environment for local development, which runs the phone in the QAMU, it was three Docker
containers in total, one ran the QAMU, one ran the complete base station with the word
phything, and one ran the complete, ran two Osmo.com BB phones as part of the network.
So you could communicate with the target phone over GSM.
The phone only has one essential feature, it's sending and receiving SMS.
As you cannot interact with the UI, sending SMS is absolutely useless for you as an attacker,
so something must be wrong on the receive SMS side.
This is what an SMS looks like, on the highest level SMS are just byte strings that are transmitted
over some GSM channel, to be honest I didn't even care how the inner protocol layers worked
on GSM, I just looked at the application layers.
All of that SMS stuff is specified in GSM 3.40 and there are different TPDUs for sending
SMS, receiving SMS, for status reports, telling the core network, hey I received that SMS,
you can remove that from your database, now all that kind of stuff.
Because SMS are stored and forwarded, if you send an SMS to somebody, it is saved in the
core network and then once your phone locks on it gets an SMS and then it tells the phone,
it tells the core network that received the SMS and it gets purchased from the queue in
the core network.
Okay, so interesting for our case is the SMS deliver TPDU which is sent from the SMS service
center to the phone.
The first one to 12 bytes is the SCA, that's the, oh I didn't write that in the legend,
good question what that is, the service center address, right, then there is a PDU type,
it contains a bunch of flex, what kind of TPDU that is, is it an SMS receive and so on.
OA is the originating address, that's the sender address, PID is, yeah I have no idea,
usually you just set this to zero for a store and forward SMS, these CSS data encoding scheme
and SMS, as you can see UD, the user data is 0 to 140 bytes but we can send 160 bytes
over an SMS.
The reason for that is that you can either 8-bit encode or 7-bit encode, the ASCII text
and if you use the 7-bit encoding, if you do the math, you get 160 characters.
So that's specified in the data coding scheme, SCTS is the time for delivery when the SMS
is, I don't know which time, either the send time or the receive time, I'm not sure.
UDL is the length of the following user data.
So that's what the phone receives from the core network and it needs to parse this.
The standard SMS is relatively easy, you just fill out all these fields and you can have
an optional header in the user data in the end.
If that header is present, you set a bit in the PDU type, if that is not present, you
just don't set the bit and you don't have that header in there.
This is used for stuff like ringtones and operator logos and SMS also support formatting.
Nobody ever implemented this as far as another, you can have both text, italic and so on.
And all of that stuff, you can have pre-defined animations, emails, all that kind of stuff,
the spec is cool to read.
And all of these features would be configured using or specified using this user data header
that is in the user data then, if that bit is set.
For normal SMS, as I said, it is either 7-bit ASCII encoding or UCS2 for Unicode-like encoding.
I think there are different character sets for Arabic and Turkish and all that stuff in
ASCII.
But you can also use something like unicodes if you do the 8-bit encoding and set the data
coding scheme to UCS2.
And then UDL and UD just contains the data that you want to send around.
For the special SMS, as I said, there can be logos, ringtones, concatenated text and
so on.
And in this case, the user data header is present to set this bit and the data coding
scheme is usually set to 8-bit.
That's actually not true, I think.
Because I think you can also set it to 7-bit.
It's been a while since I implemented that.
The Nokia phones, the later ones, this doesn't, but this already supports concatenated SMS.
You could concatenate up to three SMS if you couldn't express yourself in 160 characters.
And the way this works is exactly by using a user data header.
That means you set this bit in the PDU type that the header is present and then the structure
in the user data looks like this, I just drew this below the user data field.
UDHL is the header length that's following in bytes.
IEI is the information element identifier.
That's what this header describes.
Zero means concatenated SMS, OXOA means it's text formatting, all that kind of stuff.
And then based on the type, the following data has different lengths.
So because of that, they added in information element length.
In the case of concatenated SMS, that's three because three bytes are following.
And then a reference number follows the total number of parts and the current part number
of that concatenated SMS.
That means in the Nokia case, if you fill up the complete SMS buffer and you would send
three SMS, ref number would be some number so that the receiving phone can see that these
three SMS that it received belong together.
Parts would be set to three and part number would be set to either one, two or three.
And then the payload follows.
The payload can be in different data coding schemes.
Padding one is the seven-bit ASCII again because it's seven bits.
You may need to add padding.
In this case, it's one bit because that is horrible to parse and horrible to build.
Because you have first byte-wise structured header, then you need to add padding bits
to make the address in the SMS, the offset in the SMS where the text starts, seven-bit
aligned, and then the seven-bit text follows, which might not always align with a byte boundary,
so you need to shift stuff around and concatenate it and so on.
Luckily enough, Osmocom, the Osmocor, it's a library from the Osmocom guys which contains
a lot of parsing code and all that kind of stuff already implements almost all of this.
Yeah, in my case, the bug was in the SMS reassembly that Box was supposed to be a Unicode error,
I guess Unicode is hard.
So when the phone receives an SMS to my phone, it checks if the UDH present bit in the PDU
time is set.
If that's not the case, it's just going to interpret this as a normal SMS according to
the data coding scheme and deliver this to the UI, or save this in the UI, the baseband
forwards the raw string, like everything in green here, this string would be delivered
from the baseband to the UI and the UI would parse this.
So the phone then, if it sees that there is a header, it checks the information element
ID, if that's type zero, that which means it's a concatenated SMS.
If that's the case, the SMS gets put in a queue identified by the reference number until
it sees that all of the parts arrived.
If all arrived, it's mem copied into a buffer and it's presented to a user, like the big
text that's now concatenated.
If parts are missing still, it leaves it in the queue because there might be more arriving
later.
This is the appropriate code for that, just a small snippet, it's the function that would
be called to reassemble and deliver an SMS that was deemed to be received complete.
We have a character array with 460 bytes.
You can have 459 characters in a concatenated SMS with three parts in total.
So the character array is 460 bytes long because of the terminating zero byte.
It's initialized with zero.
Then I'm iterating over that list with the concatenated SMS parts.
I am checking the data coding scheme in the case that it's 8-bit encoding, which wouldn't
fill up the complete buffer.
I'm copying stuff with a mem copy into that payload buffer, defined on the stack, identified
by the part number, times 160 bytes minus 6, the 6 bytes is because of the 6 bytes header
in front of the SMS.
So we would copy 136, either in the payloads at index 0, 136 times 2 and so on, based on
the part number, the SMS defines.
Because I can't just copy it with 1, 2, 3 sequentially because the SMS might arrive in
a different order.
The data is being copied from the received SMS here at the payload data at index 6, which
is directly after the user data header and the length is either the complete length minus
the header that would be this case, or the length that is in the last SMS.
So if you would have the last SMS not completely full, it would just copy a chunk of that.
Afterwards, it calls some DB helper function which saves stuff and displays stuff in the
UI.
Now, where's the bug?
Any ideas?
Yes?
No.
That is correct.
The last one, if it's not completely filled up, this term here is not, so the payload length
minus the header is not larger than 136.
So it would use this part, which is the length in the SMS minus 6, yes?
The part number is not bounced checked, which means this part number can either be 1, 2,
or 3.
If I set this to 4, I would copy stuff at the end of this buffer.
And because stacks grow downwards, I would copy behind that buffer where local variables
are in the return pointer.
So if I send an SMS, a concatenated SMS with, for example, part number 1, 2, and 4, then
it would try to re-assemble this because it received three SMS and the total part number
was 3.
And by copying the data, it would copy the first two SMS into this buffer and the third
SMS behind that buffer and overwrite the return pointer, which upon return of that function
would be overwritten, and I can point this to my raw gadgets and get code execution that
way.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's what I just explained.
Yeah, okay, I have a demo for that.
The idea behind that is I gave the team's netcat on the target device so that they would just
need to execute a program on there and get a reverse shell back.
A few teams tried to send the flag back using an SMS, but that would be the nicest solution
of all, but the problem is you need to keep the UI from crashing.
If the UI crashes, the baseband sees that the socket is closed and you can't do any
kind of GSM transactions anymore and that caused a bunch of people problems.
Also one interesting fact is a few people, especially from China, playing remotely had
problems connecting to the base station over the VPN because GSM is time-critical.
And if you have a lot of delay, then stuff might not arrive in time and you lose bursts.
Okay, now what I gave the teams were a bunch of scripts to start all of that stuff.
I'm going to start the base station now, that's just a Docker container, and the phone and
you will see what's going on.
This is the development environment I gave them with fake flags.
So the flags won't be the real ones, but the environment apart from having a compiler
and everything in the QM image, it's completely the same.
Okay.
So that's the base station and then...
That's the phone booting, it's going to take a while.
Okay, the pin code is one, two, three, four, hopefully it gets some network, yeah, okay.
So it has the network connectivity, it's the only phone on the network right now.
I am now, I built my own Docker container with a patched Osmocom BB in there, which allows
me to send my three exploit SMS that I doctored in a way that the header is what I need it
to be.
That's just that run script, and now I need to copy and paste some stuff because I was
too lazy to put this in a script.
That's just to connect to the VPN, because all these containers don't have a direct connection
that they have this VPN stuff, so that you can just use this against the development
environment during the CTF as you would against the final challenge.
This top right window contains the Word file layer one for Osmocom BB, the lower left is
the phone, so that's running now and it's getting network access, that the output looks
familiar because it's the same code I'm using essentially.
And now you can turn it onto that phone and use the Osmocom BB UI.
There was a way how to maximize a window in Tmux, does anybody know how?
Yeah, control B, I know, whatever, I'm just going to do it that way.
Okay, enable.
We can see the subscribers, this is the first phone that's also on the network now.
I can send SMS to the phone.
We can test if that works, SMS 1, and then I can send an SMS to 999 and then it wants
some text, and that should arrive now, yeah, okay, that works.
No sound, sadly, also no snake, that's, yeah, okay, if we look at the exploit, it's dirty
and I could have made this nicer.
This is the function I'm calling soon over the text user interface.
I'm building this SMS header with the user data header length, the information element
which has zeros and concatenated SMS, the payload length, the ref number which in this
case is 0x23 and three parts.
And then depending on the parameter which is 1, 2, 3 or 4, I give it on the text UI, it's
going to either send this SMS with this payload, this SMS with this payload or this SMS with
this payload.
The teams I saw playing this change did this way nicer, they created a proper command where
you could just paste hex strings into the UI and it would send this, but I was just too
lazy.
Yeah, okay, we are going to have a connect back shell.
So that means I need to start a netcat listener on port 1, why you would see in a minute.
And so that's listening now, and I can send the SMS, I call this command exploit.
I want to use phone 1 to send the exploit to telephone number 999, send SMS 1, so it's
going to send the SMS, we need to write a bit, successful, now the phone is idle again,
we can send the second one, and we can send the third one, and now I need to switch fast
enough to that terminal, because hopefully I'm going to get a connection, yeah, okay.
And that's the connect back shell.
This is what it would look like doing a CTF, and you would open a beer now.
If this was a real challenge, you would find the flag here, you paste the flag into our
web interface and you gain points.
The exploit itself, I mean, this is pretty boring, this is just some hex strings, that's
the ROP chain.
This handy script here builds all of this, Nick last thankfully worked with me on this,
because he's way better at doing ROP chains, and yeah, this uses so-called gadgets from
the application itself, and builds a stack that executes specific, it always returns to
that address to the end of a function, and then it executes a bunch of instructions that
we documented here in the comments, and in the end what it's going to execute is this
command here.
This looks weird, does anybody know what this is, that weird long number there, yeah, it's
an IP address, it's just an IP address and decimal form, because we didn't have enough
space to put it in there in octet form, that's a nice trick if you have limitations in code
that you can execute, also -esh, the -e is a parameter which tells netcat to execute a
command up on a successful connection, we didn't have enough, usually you would write
it that way, right, we didn't have enough space for that, so we tried some things and
that works as well, because sh is in the path and you can leave out the space, and then
also port one, why port one, because it's short, yeah, okay, I'm going to leave this running
because we're going to need this soon for the second stage, the second stage is the
SIM card, now to make this a bit more challenging for the teams, usually you can't read out
files on a SIM card, you can't read the crypto key, you can, because it's a black box, you
have this APD interface, you can't do anything more, so I figured that I would put the SIM
card in something that's called trust zone, modern ARM CPUs have two words, divided in
the normal world and the secure world, the normal world is where your standard operating
system runs on, for example android with a Linux kernel and whatever, the secure world
runs a so-called TEE, the trusted execution environment, and this thing is on modern
smartphones mostly used for DRM, stuff like Netflix with white vine and all that kind
of stuff, which decrypts encrypted video feeds, they hide keys in there, so that you
as a pirate cannot gain access to these keys and decrypt the video streams that you might
get in 4K resolution from Netflix, they're using this for other stuff as well, some security
features, I think Samsung does this for secure key storage, all that kind of stuff, and I
figured that I would just run this SIM card in this special mode, the memory or parts of
the memory and certain devices like a serial port reader that would communicate with the
SIM card, all that kind of stuff, you can assign this exclusively to the secure world,
so even if you want to from the normal world, you would be able to access that, you can't
because the hardware will prohibit accesses to this stuff from the normal world and only
from the secure world, in the secure world, I'm using a secure kernel called Opti, that's
an open source project, which is a runtime environment for the trusted execution environment,
and you can load so- you can load so-called trustlets in there, the trustlets are applications
running in the trust zone, the SIM card is just one trustlet that you can load, and then
you have a defined interface using some companion demon on the Linux, which can forward data
from the normal world, in Linux user space over to the trust zone, you can get responses
back and so on, yeah, so I built this API, the API was pretty easy, send an APU, receive
something back, that was the only API endpoint I had to implement because that's a normal
SIM card interface. The trustlets can access parts of the Linux file system using this
companion demon, and the files in the Linux file system are encrypted, so the key is stored
securely in the secure world, you can get it, you could get the SIM card files from that
target that you just popped the shell on, but you couldn't read them because you don't
have the key, yeah, and the SIM JSON that I showed earlier is just in this encrypted
file system, and only the trustlet can access this. The challenge, challenge takes to the
second stage was after you compromised the phone you need to dig deeper, there is a flag
on the SIM card and file OX4333 which you need to get, so we can talk to the SIM card
now because we popped the shell, we can't replace the trustlet because that's signed,
we can't just add our own trustlet there which would open the file, read it out and present
it to us because we can't load it because we don't have the private key. The trustlet
is not encrypted though, I'm not sure if it's optional, you could certainly build it
and encrypt it, but in this case it's not encrypted so we can grab the binary, throw
it into a disassemble and see how it works. Usually you would spend a night doing this,
I just copy and paste the code that I wrote onto the slides just to give you an idea how
you would go through the code and find the bug. So we need to open a file. I implemented
a C program that opens the interface and sends an APDU to select and read file OX4333. Here
you can see what an APDU looks like typically. First we are selecting the file, we're sending
7 bytes, this is A0 is the class that is defined in GSM 11.11, so we want to do some
GSM stuff. A4 is the select instruction, then P0 and P2 is 0, that's by definition. O2 means
length of the following data is two bytes and then we have two bytes, that's the file ID.
And we received back two status bytes, OX9F, OF means, 9F means success and I now have
15 bytes for you in response. That's the F. Then we are executing the get response call
which will give us some information about the file, we are sending the get response,
APDU with an expected length back from the SIM card of 15 because that's what we got here,
we received back 17 bytes this time because it's 15 bytes payload plus 2 bytes status report,
that's SW1 and SW2. In this case we got back some stuff and a success error code. So the stuff
in here means this is the file then OX2A, this is the file ID and here is some information about
the file, I think the access rights, all that kind of stuff. And then we are issuing a read request,
we are receiving a length with, we want to read a byte with a file with byte length 42,
that's coincidence by the way, we're sending the read request, we receive two bytes back
which in this case is an error code. So what does OX9A, OX4A mean? This is from the spec,
it means access condition not fulfilled, it's a security management error,
access condition not fulfilled, unsuccessful CHV verification at least one attempt left,
unsuccessful unblock CHV verification at least one attempt left or authentication failed.
So we're not verifying a CHV, we're not unblocking a CHV, an authentication fail,
we don't care, so access condition is not fulfilled. The pin was entered by the user of the phone,
we just pawned the CHV1. So we can conclude that we need to verify CHV2, but we don't have that,
we need to enter the pin2 to access that file. So now we need to reverse engineer
what's going on in the SIM card and find if we can somehow bypass that authentication.
If we are trying to read a binary file from the SIM card that's the appropriate codes,
with some debug output, I left that debug output in there so that teams who disassemble that stuff
can have some pointers what they're looking at. That's a nice trick, if you see an error message
and it says somewhere access right, not sufficient in an if clause, then most likely this function
checks the access conditions. So we're checking if we have a file selected, is there even a file
open right now? If not, we're replying with an error, are we allowed to access this? If not,
we reply with a security application error, otherwise we are checking if that is an elementary file
because you cannot read directories, all that kind of stuff, and it goes on and on and on and on.
So file access allowed, this is most likely where we are running into problems.
This lengthy function is the verify CHV command, this is what you would do
if you would enter a pin, this would be called. Utisimprepair is just a weird function if you have
zero bytes in a pin, so it means the pin is, it's the end of the pin, it's replaced with OXFF.
This function just replaces OXFF with zero bytes so that you have a normal ASCII string.
It might also be BCD encoded, something weird. Utisimprepair thing just makes an ASCII string
out of the pin. We're checking if we either want to verify CHV1 or CHV2, we're checking if
it's enabled, if it's not enabled, that operation always succeeds. If the JSON is wrong, we're
playing with an internal error and then we're calling CHVVerify. If CHVVerify returns success,
we also return a success to the user. So what's this function doing?
And that's by the way, the way you would reverse it, you know, that's why you would try to find
the handler of that CHV verification function and it would dig deeper and deeper and deeper into
the places where that CHV is actually compared to the one that's stored on the SIM card.
CHVVerify does not match. It's just a wrapper function around JSON formatting stuff. So we
dig into this function. After that, this does some JSON parsing. So it checks if the remaining
counts, we can enter the pin is zero. If that's zero, bad luck, we return that the pin is blocked.
Otherwise, we are comparing the pin we got from the JSON object here to the stuff we supplied
in the parameters. And we're using SER and compare for that. Where's the bug?
By the way, Intel did this as well, I think. We control CHVvel, which is passed from the user
to the SIM card. If we just give it an empty string, this SER and compare will compare zero bytes
of string length. And because every string starts with starts with the empty string,
this check will succeed. So if we just send an empty pin, this authentication will be bypassed.
The thing is, you can't do this over the phone UI. The phone UI expects you to enter at least
four digits because that's how phones work. But if we give it the empty string, then that
authentication succeeds. And that's what I'm doing here. It's the same stuff below here is
again, select, getting the response with the file length and reading the length.
And here we are verifying an empty CHV2. A0 is again the class that we are sending to the SIM card.
20 is the command to verify the CHV. Two means we want to verify CHV2, and then we have a length,
and we have all Fs, which means nothing. It's the pin is empty. And a correct SIM card would
reject this because I think by specification, it needs to be at least four characters or four
digits. But this is not a correct SIM card. So this was succeed. And we get a response code back
of 90 zero zero, which means success. Now we authenticated, we have the access rights for
CHV2, and then we can read out the flag. And this is the OX2C bytes here that we received back.
And this is the S key representation. This would be the flag if you're looking for.
I again have a demo for that. That's why I left the shells open. We still have that shell.
What you would do now is you would write the C program. You would compile this in this
development environment I gave to the teams, and just copy that over. You have W get, that was nice.
And you can just start an HTTP server.
You can just start an HTTP server, and then you would do this on some public host,
and on the congress, that's easy because you just get a public IP address.
Oh, you're right. Sorry. Here.
Okay.
There's no tap completion because the terminal is messed up. And that worked.
Yeah.
And that was the second stage. And with that, you solved the challenge,
and you owned the GSM phone. In retrospective, oh, yeah.
I would like to thank the Osmocom contributors, all of them, because without them, I wouldn't
have been able to implement that. And the experience of building that was actually quite fun,
even though it was a bit stressful, especially Vladimir Nitsky, who is a contributor to
Osmocom and Osmocom BB, he helped me. I wanted to get voice calls running,
and I bothered him a bit on IRC and on the mailing list, and he helped me.
But in the end, I had to ditch that because it just wouldn't work in the environment,
and I personally wasn't able to make it work. And Nicholas, team member, who helped me writing
the, the, the ROP chain, because without him, I would have gone crazy. Yeah,
source code is available. If you're interested in that stuff, I want to set up your own virtual
GSM network, run the code, do whatever with the code. Feel free. Yeah. In retrospective,
the challenge could have been way cooler with, I don't know, stealing secrets from a sim card,
and decrypting encrypted voice calls after that, and so on. But I ran out of time,
and also, as I said, teams only had 48 hours. And the setup was already quite cumbersome.
You had to have all these Docker containers with the, with the base station in there,
and the QMU, and the Osmocom BB. And if you never use something like that, that was challenging.
But if people solved it, I think two or three teams solved, I think three teams solved the
first stage and one or two solved the second one. So yeah. And thanks to all the teams who played
and put up, put up with my shit. Yeah, any questions?
Do you have slides available? I can share them. Yes. That would be nice.
Thank you. Twitter or wherever. I'm just going to drop. All right, thank you.
Talk. I have one question. Given the situation that you hacked a lot of stuff,
did the team solve the challenge as intended? Yes. Yep.
As far as I know, I don't have any unintended bugs in there, but even if there are unintended
bugs, that's part of the game. We also solved challenges in the past where there was some
oversight, some misconfiguration. We also had this happen to us where, I don't know,
past WD-L, under Debian, for the root password, that's something different than on Ubuntu and
suddenly you have no root password and you can log in without a password. Stuff like that always
happens that you have unintended bugs. Sometimes it happens that you have unintended bugs, and that's
part of the game. But that was not the case. Thank you.
