API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/26448
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/c4.openchaos.2018.06.glitching-the-switch
Title: Glitching the Switch

Okay, as announced, this talk is going to be about how we tried to hack the switch.
The story behind this talk is that earlier this year, multiple parties announced publicly
on Twitter and similar channels that they seemingly have found a buck in the Nintendo
Switch or at least in the chip that is being used by Nintendo in that gaming console.
although nothing was publicly released.
So I met with a friend earlier this year.
We were hacking on another project
and we thought to ourselves that,
well, maybe we could try as well to just hack the switch.
If other people were capable of doing this,
we should be able as well.
And we kind of succeeded.
We got almost there.
We were a bit late to the party
and almost 30 minutes before a description of the bug was released.
We actually found the bug, which was a bit unfortunate.
But, well, it was a nice journey and we learned a lot.
And I thought this would be a great talk to give.
So a few words what the start is going to be about.
The start is not going to be about the stuff
that Nintendo did with the operating system or stuff like that.
It's not about how browser exploits work on this platform,
how you can start, I don't know, pirated games or homebrew
or whatever you might want to do on a hack console afterwards.
But more on how a fundamental flaw in the chip itself
and the boot ROM of that chip that is being used can be abused
to circumvent all the security features on that platform
and how to execute your own code.
I'm always talking about we, and now I can,
advance the slides for whatever reason.
Ah, there we go.
I'm always talking about we.
I did this, as I said, with a friend together on the right side.
I'm on the left.
I'm a security researcher at Rapid7 right now
doing completely unrelated stuff at work.
I'm doing internet scanning and building honeypots there.
If you want to reach me, you can reach me by Twitter
or all school and IRC.
On the right side, there's a search.
He's currently living in Dublin, originally he's from Poland.
And he's right now a freelancer in DevOps and hardware
and also doing security related stuff there.
You can reach him as well.
And we know each other because we play CTF in two different teams.
But over the time, we got very close friends,
like the two teams of us.
And we have the same interests that is hardware hacking
and, well, all kinds of low-level firmware stuff.
So, yeah, we just teamed up and here we are.
A bit about the hardware that's being used by Nintendo.
If you've never seen a switch, I'm sure you have,
but this is one, it looks like a tablet.
And the nice thing about this is that you can detach
the controllers here.
And I mean, it's a portable console.
It has a battery and everything.
But you can also just take a dark that's supplied with this thing
and you can attach this by HDMI to your TV and just put it in there.
And then you have a stationary console like this.
And you can take the controllers off and put them in a holder
that you can see there.
And then you have a stationary console.
Yeah.
The hardware that's being used,
this thing is based on an NVIDIA Tegra X1.
This is an embedded chip from NVIDIA.
It has multiple CPU cores, a Corex A57 and a Corex of quad core A57,
a quad core A53 together with an NVIDIA and Maxwell GPU,
which is for the power consumption and the size of this thing,
quite impressive.
It also has 4GB of RAM, but yeah,
every phone has 4GB of RAM nowadays.
This bit about the software,
the software is completely custom.
Nintendo did not use any kind of off the shelf operating system for this.
The operating system is called Horizon and it's actually quite modern.
It has all the fancy security features that you can imagine.
It has a user and kernel mode split and an X bit
so that you can execute stuff on the stack, for example,
with a stack buffer overflow.
It now has ASLR with the newest version.
It even has ASLR in the kernel.
So it has actually quite a lot of security features.
The boot flow is customized by NVIDIA.
NVIDIA supplies closed source boot loaders.
If you're big enough, somebody like Nintendo is,
you can also get the source code.
But usually they don't give this out.
And Nintendo of course, customized the boot loaders for this.
Because, yeah, they need security for their consoles.
The Tegra X1 that is being used in the console,
that's the SOC, the main ship which contains all the GPU and everything,
is internally called the T210.
That's their NVIDIA code name for this thing.
I think it's the successor of the Tegra K1
that's being used in a bunch of tablets.
For example, the X1 has also been used in the Google Pixel C.
And there is already a successor.
Even when Nintendo announced that they're going to release the switch,
the successor was already out.
But, yeah, it takes time to design such a thing
and write the software and everything.
So, yeah, might have been too close of a call to just use the X2.
What's interesting is that the X2 looks like a complete redesign.
If you compare the data sheets, this thing is completely different.
It uses different CPU cores.
The architecture inside looks different.
Yeah.
For the X1, the nice thing is it's an off-the-shelf chip.
So, you can actually get documentation.
It's a 3,000-page data sheet, or rather technical reference manual,
that you can just download after you create an account with NVIDIA.
They don't ask you for an NEA or something like that.
It's incomplete, even though it has three thousand pages.
All the security stuff is mostly undocumented.
But it's still very extensive.
So, you can still gather quite a lot of knowledge
about what's going on in the system.
As I said, there are a bunch of property NVIDIA boot loaders.
There is a boot run that loads code from a mass storage device,
like an E-MMC, and the boot flow on the development board,
we will see this later, consists of, I don't know, four boot loaders, I think.
Most of them are closed source, but, I mean, you can reverse engineer them,
but they are undocumented.
But it's actually not very hard to find out what they do.
Yeah, the switch has custom boot loaders,
and they have the security features of that chip enables.
That means that you cannot just load your own code on the platform
and just execute your own operating system, like Linux or whatever.
Because, first of all, I think the hardware is subsidized,
so they want to try to sell games and make money by selling the games.
And, of course, they want to prevent privacy, privacy, not privacy.
So, you can't just copy games, or, also, they have certain quality standards.
They don't want everybody to write games that might be not good enough
for them to have them on their platform.
So, they're keeping a close eye on what people can actually run on that platform and whatnot.
And this is what we're going to hack.
You don't have to be able to read this,
but this is a block diagram of the SOC that I copied out of the reference manual.
You can see that this thing is a beast.
It's essentially a complete, let me say, computer, whatever a computer is nowadays,
and one single chip.
On the top here, you can see on the top left,
you can see the main CPU's on the bottom here is a memory controller,
and there are a bunch of bus systems between this,
so that the CPU's can access the DDR4 memory.
There is a GPU here, a bunch of peripherals here,
like a UR, a serial console, or a serial port.
Whatever you do with it, doesn't have to be a console.
I squared CSPI, all kinds of stuff.
And everything is connected using these crossbar switches, which are bus systems.
Think of it like, if you have a main board and you plug in a PCI Express device,
something like that, this is essentially bus system, not exactly like that,
but the concept is the same.
Yeah, so what's interesting is that here is another CPU.
Down here is another one.
This is a full-fledged Cortex-A9, which they can use for audio.
I don't know if, I don't know if Nintendo does use this,
but this core is actually has enough features to boot Linux.
I don't know if anybody tried this before, but it should be possible.
Here's another small core that's what we are going to look at, mostly,
because this is the so-called BPMP.
BPMP stands for boot and power management processor,
or bootstrap and power management processor, I don't remember.
And this thing is the first CPU that runs code when the system is turned on.
The GPU, the GPU, and so on don't even have power when you turn on the CPU.
Also, when this core executes code, the DRAM is not configured yet,
so you don't have memory.
This is the reason why, on the top here, you have four small SRAMs.
It's 256 kilobytes in total, because if that CPU needs to run code,
it has to have some kind of memory where it can put its variables, its state, whatever.
And also here is a block that's called iROM, and iROM is the boot ROM.
This is the first code that this BPMP processor executes when the system turns on.
And this code in the ROM is responsible for checking a lot of stuff that is security-related.
And this is the code that enforces that you can't just run whatever you want on this platform.
The nice thing about this chip is you can buy this chip.
This has not been the case on other gaming consoles before.
You always had to buy a gaming console, hack it first, get code execution there
to get an idea what this thing looks like on the inside.
Now we have documentation, and we have something that we can break.
Because we can just buy, I mean, yeah, we can also break a switch,
but this is way easier to work with if you want to exploit something.
I also brought my board with me here.
This is the thing.
It's just some small UART adapter still on there.
And the cool thing is, the security is disabled.
We can just load code and just execute it and just play around with the platform
without having to break any kind of crypto or, I don't know,
exploit the web browser on the console first to get user-led execution,
then have a kernel exploit to get more privileges and so on to run our own code
to break even more of the security.
So we can just load code on there and play around with it.
And I got a student discount.
Yeah.
These things, if somebody's interested, is around 250 years with the discount.
This is what, so the board, as you can see, is a main carrier board.
Oops.
It's a main carrier board, and me.
It's a main carrier board, and on top, there is a module which contains all the
important components.
This thing here, and it contains the main SOC.
That's the chip that you saw the block diagram over here.
Some RAM.
The EMMC, which is a fancy SD card essentially on a chip,
which is way faster than a normal SD card because it just has more pins.
So a bigger bus.
And some power supply stuff and a Bluetooth and Wi-Fi chip.
This is the switch main board.
It's all a lot smaller.
I stole this picture from my fix-it, by the way.
They do nice teardowns.
Again, this is the SOC.
It doesn't say Tegraik's one in there, but it is one that was found out pretty
already because somebody just looked on this chip on their microscope,
and it looked exactly like an off-the-shelf chip.
Some DDR4 memory.
This is the Wi-Fi chip.
I think it's a different Wi-Fi chip.
It doesn't matter for this talk.
And I don't even know what these chips are.
I think this is some USB controller thing.
He's the USB port.
He has a power port here.
Somewhere here is a cartridge port because you can get cartridges in the console.
So you can talk to these and so on.
This port here, I think, is for the EMMC.
It's conveniently placed on a nice add-on board.
So you can rip this off, read it out, make backups, whatever.
Very nice of Nintendo to socket these.
Okay.
Now that we know how the system looks like, how do we own it?
This is the boot flow of the system.
We can see I colored these boxes differently depending on what CPU the code is running on.
The red one is the BPMP.
This is what we are going to care about.
And the blue ones are the CC plaques, which then for CPU complex,
these are the big arm cores that are started later by one of the boot loaders,
and then code is executed there.
This is usually where your Linux runs and so on.
So this is the boot flow of the development board.
This is not the boot flow of the switch.
The switch has way less of these boot loaders here.
I don't think it even has any of these, but I did not look at the switch boot loaders.
So I don't really know.
So what happens is when the system turns on, the first thing, as I said,
that's executed is the boot run.
The boot run has multiple paths.
I even left out one here because I again did not look at this as the warm boot path.
If you put your device into suspend, it goes into this warm boot path,
but no idea how it works to be honest.
And the first path here is the normal boot path.
It tries to load something that NVIDIA calls NVT boot from mass storage,
which runs on the BPMP.
This is the first boot loader.
That boot loader again loads NVT boot CPU because that's a boot loader
that then runs on the CCplex here after loading NVT boot.
Power management firmware is loaded into that core
so that you can do all kinds of power management,
like put the device into suspend and so on.
This is handled then on the BPMP CPU.
And then that NVT boot CPU loads a boot loader called Cboot.
Never heard about it.
Able to load Linux and some fast boot stuff for Android tablets and so on.
Then this usually loads either directly Linux or normally it loads Uboot.
And this is actually the first component that you can get sourced.
And then it jumps into Linux and it does its thing.
The other path is interesting, it's called RCM and stands for recovery mode.
If the boot from fails to load NVT boot for example from the EMC
because the EMC isn't there or it's corrupted or whatever,
then it goes into this RCM path.
You can also force this by pressing some buttons.
And then you have an USB device that you can use to load code into the chip.
And then you usually load something that's called NVT boot recovery,
which then runs from RAM and then you can talk to this thing
and you can reflash the EMC or whatever master-rich device
you have on your board or on your device where the operating system lives.
Of course, we can't just use this because RCM as well enforces security.
So everything that you load has to be signed with a certain private key
from Nintendo.
Otherwise if a signature is checked, if the signature is wrong,
the thing will not execute this code.
Yeah, this is true for this path and this path.
And also after NVT boot is loaded, NVT boot,
of course, checks signatures of the next stage
and of the next stage and of the next stage should secure to be enabled.
The boot from itself does a bunch of things.
First is basic hardware bootstrapping.
It has to configure some pillars so everything on the chip has clocks to work with.
Then it determines what to do.
Either boot into RCM or do a warm boot or where to load the boot loader from.
It does this by looking at so-called fuse bits,
configuration bits that you can only write once and then afterwards read.
Yeah, after that it tries to find on the master device the thing that's called VCT.
The boot configuration table contains mainly parameters for the memory controller.
So that you have DDR4 memory or DDR3 or whatever else the memory controller can talk to.
You need to do link trainings and all that fancy stuff.
So you need to configure this memory controller with the right values.
And everything is specified in the VCT.
Also, the VCT tells the boot ROM where to find the boot loader,
what boot loader to load and the hash of the boot loader.
And the VCT is signed so we can change that.
If you change the boot loader, the hash does not match anymore.
You can't change the hash in the VCT after you change the boot loader
because that would break the signature.
So everything is in order and you can't just load code without having the private key.
The ROM is interesting because the ROM is the root of trust.
If you defeat any kind of security in that ROM, you can load whatever code you want.
This, as I said, is the root of trust.
So you have to trust that boot ROM.
If you can't trust that boot ROM anymore, you can do whatever you want on that platform.
The ROM, although, is secret.
You can't just read it out even though we can execute code because we all know
if something is secret, it's way more secure.
But what we can do is we can try to torture the dashboard and try to extract that ROM somehow.
We will see later how we did this.
So the boot ROM law, how does it work?
Well, let's look at the technical reference manual.
I just searched for secure boot and you don't find that much, but you find this table.
This table describes two important registers.
The first one is called SBCS-R0 and the second one is called SBPI-ROM-START0.
And if we look at that, the first one, SBCS-R0,
we can see that its reset value is O1.
These are bits. The X means don't care and not implement it.
The other ones are either zero or the last one is one.
If we look at what this means is the first bit says secure boot flag.
If that's one, we are booted into secure mode.
So obviously on reset, that's the case.
And then another interesting thing is this PI-ROM disable.
The documentation doesn't really tell us what this means,
but this text already tells us a lot.
It means protected I-ROM disable.
We know that the I-ROM is the ROM itself where the BPP executes the code from.
And if it sets one, it means that this seems to be disabled.
And on boot, it's zero.
The other register, to be honest, I have no idea why they implemented this,
as BPI-ROM-START.
And it says this specifies the offset from the start of the boot ROM to the protected region.
This register is only programmable while in secure mode,
which means secure boot flag in the register above needs to equal one.
This is a reset set to OX1000.
What this register does is even if the boot ROM is locked,
you can configure how much can be read of the boot ROM.
Like the offset from the start to whatever is specified in this register
is readable even though it's locked.
And this is only writeable if we are in secure boot mode.
Like if this last bit here in the SBCSR0 register is set to one.
And it's not only that only this register is writeable
if that flag is set to one, but also the other one, this SBCSR0.
So the idea is that you can lock the boot ROM and write protected registers
so that you can't unlock this afterwards.
That's the theory.
That's what we guessed.
So I wrote some code that just tries to read the boot ROM
to see what's going to happen.
So these defines here, these are the addresses of these two registers.
SBCSR0 and SPI-ROM-START, because I wanted to know
what the values of these registers are after the boot ROM
ran and loaded our code.
Because we assume that the boot ROM is going to be locked there.
This is the address of the i-ROM and we're just going to dump it.
So what it does is it initializes the UART.
That's why that your thing was still dangling on that board.
And we're dumping the two registers just using some printf
and then try with the hack-stump function that I wrote
to dump the 96 bytes of, 96 kilobytes of code where the i-ROM is.
So let's see what it does.
This is the output that you get.
I shorted this a bit.
We can see that SBCSR0 is set to 0x10.
The reset value was 0x1.
So something wrote to that register.
SPI-ROM-START 0 wasn't touched apparently because it's still 0x1000.
So we should be able to read out the first four kilobytes of the ROM.
And that's what we can see here.
It starts at this address.
It dumps some stuff.
I shorted this here.
And here's address 0x1000.
And this looks like code.
This actually looks like ARM code.
I can tell not because I'm a disassembler on LEX,
but because there is a trick to ARM code.
If you see a lot of ease here in this byte and this byte and this byte.
This has something to do with how instructions are encoded on ARM.
This is a good pointer that this might be ARM code.
Also if you disassemble this,
you can see that this code actually makes sense.
But here at LEX 1000, we just get some weird stuff back.
Not seemingly randomly looking stuff, but always the same pattern.
And if you disassemble this,
it's the upcode for jump to address 0.
Why?
No idea.
I never tried to jump to address 0.
Maybe this chip resets or whatever.
So if you try to execute this code here after the boot drum is locked,
it does whatever, but not going to execute the ROM again.
And also we can't read it.
Okay, so we confirm that our assumption most likely was right
how this ROM locking works.
So what it seems to do is that this SBCS-R0 really controls the ROM visibility.
Because we can tell that the dump showed that the value of this register was OX10,
but the reset value is OX1.
So something, and OX10 means secure boot flag is disabled,
so we can't write this register anymore.
And PI ROM disabled is set to disable.
So we can conclude that something in the boot ROM,
just before jumping to our code,
writes into this register and disables the read access to the boot ROM.
Because initially the boot ROM has to be unlocked,
because the code needs to be executed and data needs to be loaded from that ROM and so on.
Okay, we need to skip this instruction.
And the idea was we apply something that we call voltage glitching.
We can't debug the boot ROM using JTAG and just tell it to skip that instruction or whatever,
so we somehow need to convince the chip to not write into this register.
So we apply voltage glitching to do this.
So to find out how this voltage glitching works,
I'm going to explain to you very briefly.
You can have multiple semesters of lectures about this,
how microchips work.
But very briefly, I'm going to explain how usually a chip works.
It's not always the case, but most of the time, and that's correct.
So one of the building blocks of modern chips is a D flip-flop.
That D flip-flop is used to save data on every rising edge on this clock pin.
So the pins that you can see here, the D pin is a data pin,
and the clock pin here is a clock pin.
On the left side you have inputs, on the right side you have outputs,
the Q is an output, and the Q bar is the inverted output.
The reason why you have this inverted Q there is because you can get it
for free when you build a flip-flop.
So it's nice to have, if you need the inverted output signal,
you can just spare an inverter after that.
So what happens is you apply a clock here that goes from low to high,
stays a while high, goes from high to low, and after a while it repeats the cycle.
So you have a clock that's taking all the time with a certain frequency.
And every time there is a rising edge on that clock pin,
the data is moved, whatever the bit is, zero or one,
is moved to the Q output and the Q bar output.
This thing is also available in level-triggered variants,
so every time this pin is high, this data movement happens,
but normally you use edge-triggered flip-flops.
So D flip-flops are used to save values.
Somehow in a chip you have to store things, like CPU registers,
for example, the simplest example, you have to have some kind of storage on a microchip.
And this, because physics, if you have a real flip-flop,
there are certain performance characteristics that are important to how this thing works.
The three that are important to us is the setup time, the holds time,
and the propagation delay. What exactly this means is on another slide.
Then we have also combinatorial logic. This is what you know as digital circuits.
This is the stuff that you might have seen in school
with a bunch of gates that are just connected to each other,
that do some kind of logical function.
The typical example that you hopefully all know is a half error,
which just adds two 1-bit numbers, which is displayed here on the right.
You have two inputs, A and B, and you have some output and a carrier output.
Because if you add two 1-bit numbers, you get a 2-bit number out,
because it might overflow into the next bit.
It's basically the next decimal, not decimal binary point, binary place, rather.
And also here, we need to be careful because that signal that travels from the inputs to the
outputs takes time, because all these gates need time to switch and settle.
So it takes some time for the input values to travel through all these things to the output value,
until the signal is stable on the output. That's called the propagation delay.
Now, if we combine these two things, it looks something like this.
And in modern CPU, for example, why does it run at 4 GHz and not 40 GHz?
I mean, we can create clocks that are, I don't know, 40 GHz, apart from the
electrical problems that you're going to get, because this is a very high frequency.
The reason for that is that a chip usually works like this. You have
this D flip-flop, which saves some value. You have some combinatorial logic,
and then you have an output flip-flop that, again, saves the value.
So what happens is you have an input, the clock goes to the rising edge for sake of simplicity.
Let's assume that this clock here and this clock here, that there is no delay between these two.
In reality, of course, there is a delay usually because the signal takes time to travel through
this line to this flip-flop. But let's assume we have some data here,
and your clock edge comes, then it switches to the output.
At the same time, the value that has been calculated by the combinatorial logic in between
is already here at the output flip-flop. So when the clock edge rises, both of these flip-flops
will hand the value at D over to the Q output. So we get basically the result of the combinatorial
logic calculation on the output, and at the same time, the combinatorial logic
circuit is being fed with a new value to calculate through this flip-flop.
And the reason why we can't just raise the clock frequency however we want is that all these delays
with the flip-flops and the combinatorial logic and the setup and whole times that are needed
need to be taken into account. So if the clock switches faster, then the signal takes from
to go from here through this logic to here, we are going to get garbage out.
The setup and whole times, I copied this thing out of a data sheet from a flip-flop. You can
buy these things as dip chips or whatever is still available, if you want to put these on a breadboard
and play around with them. And we can see here the Cp pin, this is the clock again, we can see the
data pin and we can see the two outputs. And as I said, this flip-flop is edge-triggered,
which means every time we were rising it here on the clock, something will happen down here.
So this happens two times here and here. And if we look at the deep pin, these shaded areas here
mean that it doesn't matter what this deep pin is, because the chip, the flip-flop will only act
on the rising edge of the clock. So we can see here at the time of the rising edge, D is on a high
level. And so it takes some time to propagate through this chip and the Q output at some point
in time goes high. Same deal here, just the inverse, we have a rising edge again, the D pin is low,
and after a while the signal again propagates through the flip-flop and the level here goes low.
Now, what about this setup on hold times? The setup time describes the duration
how long before rising it clock edge occurs that a stable signal needs to be present at the input.
This is what you can see here. You can see here that the clock goes high, but at the time here,
the signal on D already needs to be high even before the clock occurs, the clock edge occurs.
Then we have the whole time, this is similar, but after the rising clock edge. So we can see here
that we have the clock edge and here again is a duration specified TPLH, which says, no, TH here.
So for this amount of time, the D input needs to be stable, either 0 or 1, otherwise bad things
will happen. And then again we have the propagation delay and the propagation delay is just the time
how long it takes from here when the rising edge occurs until the D value is actually forward to Q.
This is this TPLH, for example, here that it takes the signal to travel from here to here.
The setup on hold times, why are they even there? How can we find out how high they are?
The logic gates are nowadays built most of the time, again in so-called CMOS technology.
So you have MOSFETs, N-channel and P-channel MOSFETs, this is just an N-channel MOSFET to see
what these things actually do. This thing is a switch. If the signal is pulled to low,
this will stop conducting and the LED turns off. So power will flow from here through the LED,
it can't pass this MOSFET, so the LED will be off. If we pull the so-called gate, this is this pin
here high or up a certain threshold, then this thing will start to conduct and the current can
flow from here through this resistor, through the LED, back to ground, back into the battery,
so the LED lights up. This is what you do with that switch here. You connect this gate basically
to the supply voltage and then this thing starts to conduct. If you leave this switch, then this
resistor will discharge, like pull all the charges away from here and this will be pulled to low,
so it turns off again. So every time you press the switch, the LED turns on, if you release it,
it turns off. The gate here needs to be charged. It behaves like a capacitor and
if you pull the voltage on the capacitor, it takes some time for it to ramp up and actually
pull the charges into the capacitor to fill it up. Then there is a certain threshold in this MOSFET
where it starts to open up and starts to conduct current to turn on the LED.
A logic gate or flip-flop consists of multiple of these things. So again, every time you chain
these things, it again takes more and more time to charge up these gates to make them do or discharge
them to make them do stuff. So this adds up and this is how the propagation delays
also affect the setup at whole time. So the setup time, for example, is you need some time
to charge up all the gates of the MOSFET in such a D-flip-flop or wherever else and the whole time
is that all this stuff needs to propagate through this logic gate or the flip-flop until the signal
really is stable on the output. Again, oh yeah, and if we of course violate these periods,
then this thing might not turn full on or not at all and the LED might only be half on or something
like this. So the MOSFET doesn't really do what we expect anymore. What's interesting is that
if we increase the voltage that we put on the gate, we can make them switch faster.
So because if we apply a voltage, some current will flow into the gate and if we have a higher
voltage according to Ohm's Law, we will get a higher current and a higher current means that we can
current is charges per second, that we can put more charges into the gate capacitance and thereby
turn the MOSFET on faster or discharge it faster and turn it off faster. When we can
charge the gate faster, we can switch faster because charging the gate is essentially a switching
operation and that's the reason why overclockers increase the core voltage of the CPUs when they
raise the clock. Of course you can't do this, you can only do this up to a certain point because
there are more effects to this. The chip gets warmer because it dissipates more power,
it switches faster, it dissipates even more power and at some point in time chips just break.
But what would happen if we on purpose decrease the voltage instead of increasing it like overclockers do
to violate these set up in whole times? Things will break. So we get a so-called glitch. So
the logic circuit will not do anymore what it's expected to do, we just need to do it right to get
the effect that we want. So what should we glitch? We saw earlier that most likely that SBCs
are zero thing controls the ROM logout and initially the ROM is not locked so that's the state
that we want to keep. So SBCs are zero has to be written by the ROM somewhere right before leaving
the ROM code and jumping into our code. And the right to that register the truffet over multiple
buses, I don't know if that register is exactly in this block here, I just assume it because it says
system configuration system registers so it would make sense for it to be there.
So if that boot ROM code tries to write to that register it has to issue a write of this bus,
this bus decides oh yeah that is this in this memory region, I need to forward it over this path
to this bus and then this bus decides oh yeah it's that system configuration register,
I need to forward it to this block and then inside that block there is some logic that
changes the register value and so on. So these are kind of like imagine that earlier with the
slide with the flip flops and logic another flip flop some logic another flip flop and this
multiple stages of these like in this path and we only need to disturb one single part of this bus
transaction to cause problems and we don't even care how we are going to disturb it, it just needs
to break somehow. It can write a wrong value to that register, it can write to the wrong address,
the write could be too late for the clock cycle to happen and it is happening but it's happening
too late, all this kind of stuff. The problem with that is we can also hit the wrong spot,
so either we are too violent and take away too much power then the CPU just crashes or stops,
locks up or we do it at the right spot then we glitch not the right instruction that we want to
glitch but another one before or after so we don't get the desired result that we actually want.
Also we still need to run code, it's not enough to just glitch away that register write, our code
that runs after the ROM still needs to be able to read out that ROM and dump this to the serial
port so that we can get a dump of the ROM. So how are we going to find the sweet spot?
The idea is that we look at the EMMC traffic, the traffic between the SOC like the main chip
and the EMMC because we know that the boot ROM has to load code from there because it loads our
code from there, we wrote that in there and the SOC is configured to look at the EMMC
for loading the code. So we can sniff that and just try to find out
what the last transaction is that happens there so we have a stable timing anchor from where we
can try different things. So we hooked up an FPGA to do that and wrote some code to analyze the EMMC
traffic and we used the last transaction as a trigger so we wait for that trigger and then we
wait a random, not random but we wait in the amount of time. After that we glitch so we take away the
power to the chip, we wait for our code to execute or not depending on what happens, we see if we
can actually dump the code, if not we adjust that time and we repeat the whole thing and we just
write a script and just leave the thing running and every time we increase dollar time a bit
to sweep over the whole region and see if we can hit the sweet spot at some place.
This is an image that I did while doing all of this. We needed to find the right voltage range
to glitch and these modern SOCs have a lot of voltage range so on the other side here is the chip
and all these capacitors here are hooked into the different voltage rates and
I took my multimeter and just beeped everything out and tried to find out what is connected to
where. Green for example here is the ground plane I think and then I just soldered wires to the
different colored points and measured what voltage is there and we ran an endless loop on the CPU
which just prints numbers and when I soldered the wire this is not something to try at home but we
didn't care if we break the thing, we just shorted the thing to ground and usually it doesn't break
because the voltage regulators can detect this and they turn off, they then turn on again, they
see oh it's still short, I turn off again after a while and then it tries again but at some point
in time and then we look for crashes. One funny story is you can't read this because it's in pink
also graph coloring is hard because I ran out of colors at some point. Here is something that says
3.3 volt smoke. I hooked up, this point here, I hooked it up to ground and something on this
work stop it's smoking. I have no idea what it was because the still board still works.
I unhooked it and it refleshed Linux and it booted and everything works, Wi-Fi works,
Bluetooth works, the GPU still works, I have no idea what went up into smoke.
We looked for crashes because the assumption is when we take away the power supply for the CPU
it has to stop and we found this slightly green color here in this area to be the right voltage
tray. Down here you can see that we sold out wires to some test points and this is the MMC
port kind of. There are some test points where the MMC traffic is so we just sold out wires to
there and just moved them out for easier access to hook them up to the FPGA so that we can snip
the traffic. So this is the assumption that this CPU is only running on one voltage and all the
other components running on the other one. So the question was, I'm just going to repeat
for the recording in the stream, the question was is the assumption that the CPU only runs on this
one voltage? No, it's not, we just tried and this was the only voltage rate that did something.
Some of the voltage rates were just turned off. We didn't know for example for the main CPU or
the GPU at this point in the boot process. We weren't even sure that this is the right voltage
rate because for example if you imagine if you have such a lot amount of voltage rates that you
that you have on this chip, they are useful kinds of stuff in the chip. Maybe for the clock
generation circuit, maybe this gets its own voltage. If we knock out the clock generation,
we of course knock out the CPU as well, but this is not what we want. We just assumed that one
rate that we found was the right one and it turned out to be the right one. Pure luck. Usually you
would just look that up in the datasheet, but we didn't have a datasheet with a pin out for that
chip, so we had to guess. We also didn't have schematics for this module only for the carrier
board, and this module generates all the important voltages by itself. So yeah, sure guessing.
This is the setup that that Syatch came up with. You can see the main board with all kinds of
wires attached and oscilloscope probes. This is just a UART adapter and this is the FPGA board
with a logic analyzer attached so we can see what it's doing. This board ran the FPGA bitstream,
which sniffed the EMMC traffic, generated the trigger for the MOSFET that we hooked up to the
voltage rail to pull it to ground, to short it to ground and take away the power for the chip.
We wrote a script that did this loop where we glitched it, we looked at the output, we
reset the board and we adjust the time, reset the board and repeat, and left this thing running
overnight. And when reviewing, we just recorded everything our code spit out on the serial console.
At the next morning, we looked at the dumps and we saw that at one place, it actually started
dumping. It said, well, that register is still the reset value and here's the wrong, but
it wasn't the wrong. It was still that EF, whatever, jumped to zero thing.
So we didn't think much of this. We thought that it might not have glitched correctly,
we hit the wrong spot, maybe we glitched our code. The CPU was maybe in a weird state where
it was drunk because it didn't get enough power at some time, it was stuck in some weird thing.
So we, well, didn't care at that time. Later, it turns out I read from the wrong address.
The wrong dumping worked, I just dumped the wrong address because I forgot a zero in the address of
the wrong. Yeah. And then search left for a business trip for a week, directly after the next day,
and I was sitting at home, not having that. So this was all in Dublin, I was in Ahren.
So I didn't have this stuff. And I didn't have that FPH where I had the code and everything,
I would have been able to set this up by myself, but I didn't have this FPGA board and it was just
too lazy to port the code to an FPGA board that I had at hand. Yeah. So I tried my own setup.
Because I didn't want to port the code, I needed another trigger. And this was the dumbest idea ever.
I just used the reset release as a trigger. So remember when we, when we do this loop,
where we reset the board, try to glitch, adjust the time, see if we glitched, adjust the time,
reset the board again, I just use this reset as my timing anchor.
I then wrote my code so that I turn on a GPIO directly after the first thing that Michael did
was turn on the GPIO, just a pin that you can turn on enough, like on an Arduino.
And I hooked up my scope and I measured the time between how long it takes between reset release
and my GPIO going high. So I essentially measured how long it takes for the boot drum to do its thing.
The idea was that I just need to move that glitching pulse then while looking at my oscilloscope
shortly before my GPIO goes high because turning the GPIO on was the first action of my code. So
right before the boot drum must disable the boot drum. And then I just move it around a bit
until I hit the spot. That was the theory. This is what this looked like. This is a
MOSFET that I bought. I just soldered it here onto this small capacitor that I ripped off the board.
It's rather small. So these things here are 0201, something like that. I even resordered
all of them that I took off. So yeah, this is just ground. This is where I hooked up my oscilloscope
probe, the blue wire, and the white wire is the signal line that my chip whisperer,
something that you can use to glitch chips, just put the signal on to turn on this MOSFET and pull
this voltage line to ground to this pad. This was my setup, a bit messier, but also a lot simpler.
This is the board again, a bunch of oscilloscope probes to look at stuff. Serial port adapter,
some voltage level shifting just because everything here runs on 1.8 volts that I cared about. So I
and this chip whisperer here, which is the glitching. This basically does the reset glitch,
just timing, reset glitch, just timing loop over and over again, controlled by some Python software.
This here, this wire is the GPIO that I measured, and then I measured how long it takes for the
boot run to do stuff. This is screenshot of my oscilloscope, and the blue one is the reset line,
the green one is the GPIO, then we have the glitch pulse every time we glitch this goes high,
and here we have the VCC line that we are going to glitch. So right now this is at 1.05 volts,
something like that. The glitch pulse is low, means we're not glitching, and this reset is low
active, that means if it's put low, reset the chip, if it's put high, let the chip run. So I
leased the reset here, and here my GPIO was high, so I can measure the time between here and here,
and that's around 60 milliseconds, very roughly. This setup was not very good, because I said
dumbest idea ever. The timing between all the runs is different every time. The 60 milliseconds
here, this time is not true, it's not always 60 milliseconds. It jitters around by, I don't know,
40, 50 microseconds all the time, so the timing is different on every single run.
Also, so the ROM seems to take a different amount of time. I suspect it's this because it
initializes PLLs, and these PLLs need some time to lock every time you reset, and this seems to take
different amount of time every time it does that. That's just a theory, I have no idea why
else that could be. As I said, the setup is very bad, that's not how you usually do it, but I just
thought I'd wing it. There is no clock synchronization, I added this picture again here, because
I just sent out glitch puzzles. And if you glitch here in the shaded area, nobody's going to care,
because that flip-flop is not doing anything, so we can't possibly violate the setup in whole
times or any kind of propagation delay, because nothing is happening on the chip right now.
So if we happen to glitch here, nothing will happen. If we synchronize the glitching code,
although to the clock that we supply to the chip, then we have a better chance of hitting,
like right in here, when it actually matters. But yeah, I didn't care. Also, I don't know why,
overly, the glitch pulse was so massive, I had to go up to several microseconds. So
multiple instructions, hundreds of instructions must have been glitched there.
And we don't have a stable timing anchor, because I didn't sniff the EMC traffic,
and just used the reset line as a timing anchor, and did the timing different all the time.
So this is what it looks like. I zoomed in on the other side, so reset is already high,
the boot drum did its thing. Here, the GPIO was high, and here I injected the glitch way too late.
So I glitched my code. So we see the voltage rate going low, and then slowly recovering here,
when the voltage regulator switched on again. And this went on and on. I tried multiple times,
like you can see it jitters around all the time. This, for example, is too late. This might be a
bit too early, this as well. And I just left the thing running. I just had the glitch here,
and this wobbled around all the time. So the idea was maybe, if I just leave it running long enough,
because I knew that the glitches would do something sometimes, maybe I'm lucky, and because of the
jitter all the time, I might hit the right spot. I didn't really think that that would happen.
And then on another screen, I suddenly saw this, and this was my facial expression.
This is the code that was running there. It said all the time, boot drum lock, boot drum lock,
boot drum lock, boot drum lock, and always checked is the boot drum locked here, then don't do anything,
wait for the reset, the glitch again. And suddenly it said boot drum unlocked, and it started dumping
stuff at me. And what? And again, we can see this actually worked, because we can see this is
again the hex dump. This is what we saw earlier, same stuff. And then here at OX1000, earlier we saw
this jump zero, and suddenly we get stuff back, and it looks like the other code. So we got the boot
drum. This was running in the screen. I just dumped everything into a file, wrote a script, which
parses my hex dump code, wrote this into a binary, and opened up a beer.
Okay. That's how you get a boot drum. I never expected this to work, but sometimes you just need
to get lucky. Yeah. So last thing of the presentation is the buck. The story about this is after you
get the boot drum, you of course try to analyze this and find the buck. The way you do this is you
throw this into this December, and you look at this for a very long time, because you need to find
out what the thing does. And there are basically no strings in that boot drum. So you don't have
anything, you can now debug out for nothing. You have to go through every single function and
look at the assembler code, or using hex arrays to get some pseudo code back when you have a
decompiler license, which I gladly had because I have a license at work. So both Serge and I
spent countless hours looking at this, because you couldn't, you also couldn't Google for stuff,
because it was all undocumented. Nobody knew how this thing works, and nobody else published
anything about this. So we reverse engineer the main boot path, nothing to be found there. We
started looking at the RCM code, and it turns out the buck is actually the RCM code. RCM, I said
earlier, this is the other path that you saw earlier when you press a magic button combination
or the thing cannot boot, stands for recovery mode. This mode can be entered and reset using
some GPIOs if you press a magic button combination, or if you set a magic bit somewhere, you can
check out this by software by setting a bit in some register and then resetting the board,
then the boot drum on the next boot sees that this bit is set and it directly goes into the
RCM path, or if you have a primary boot failure, and also the recovery booted it attempted that
you can configure didn't work. So for example, on the switch, if you rip off the EMC of the board,
it can't load stuff, so it goes into RCM. RCM itself is a relatively simple USB protocol
using so-called bike transfers. You can just throw stuff at it and read stuff from it in a
circuit format, and these blobs, it's complete binary format, so no ASCII or something like that,
they are written to that back end point and there are essentially two possible uploads,
there are more but the others don't do, it's like an up or something like that. It's like
carry some versions, you can carry three different versions, they are all the same all the time,
or you can download code. You use this download code function, for example,
if you brick your device and you need to recover from that somehow or during manufacturing,
if these things are manufactured most likely, they will run through an automated process where
they go into this RCM mode and flash the first version of the operating system there and write
all the crypto keys and so on, and this will most likely be done by code that's being downloaded by
RCM. So, curriculum is big, USB crash course, how this works because that's important for the
exploit, USB devices have so-called endpoints. You can think of this of an end point like a pipe
between the host controller, that is your notebook or your PC, and the device. There is a control
endpoints, that control endpoints is used for basic device management every time you plug any
USB device, the USB host stack is going to read some so-called descriptors which tell the operating
system what kind of device is that, the master's device is that USB serial adapter is that switch,
whatever. This thing is always there, it has to be there per spec, so you always have a control end
point. Then there are bug endpoints, these are used for raw data transfers, you can, for example,
this is being used for an on USB mass storage device, if you plug in a USB mass storage device
it's going to have multiple bug endpoints where you speak some SCSI protocol over it, and you just
send these commands using a bug end point to write a blog, to read a blog and so on.
These bug endpoints have no guarantee latency, so it can take a while until the bus is free,
until they are actually transmitted to the device or read from the device, and you don't have a
guaranteed bandwidth. So if every device on the bus is just right now talking, it might get slower
and slower and slower. Now I interrupt endpoints, not important for us, these are used by
by stuff that have small, bursty packets that need to be read or written on a regular time basis,
like mice and keyboards, and there are asynchronous endpoints. That's a continuous stream of data
that needs a certain amount of bandwidth without the guarantee of it actually arriving on the other
side, so that could be lossy, that's used for audio sound cars and stuff like that,
because if you don't have the guaranteed bandwidth then audio might get choppy and so on.
And all these endpoints, you can have multiple of these, you can have multiple
bug endpoints, but you always have only one controller endpoint, but you can have multiple
bug endpoints, interrupt endpoints, asynchronous endpoints, and so on, and all of these endpoints
and theory can be used independently of each other. So while I am handling a bug transfer,
I can also have a control transfer pending that needs to be answered in between or after
handling the current bug packet. RCM uses the control endpoint, of course, because it has to be
there, and actually it's not true, two bug endpoints, one for reading, one for writing,
and the bug endpoint is used to move the RCM messages that are used to download,
code, or query the version and so on, to the device, and you can read back some error code
if that worked or not. The control endpoint, of course, supports all the standard USB control
transfers that need to be supported, and the typical controller transfers are stuff like
set address. If you plug in a USB device, it doesn't have an address assigned yet, so the
host controller over the, the host USB stake tells the device over the control endpoint,
your address is now 20, and then that device reacts every time it's talked to on that address 20.
Then there's a get status request, we will see this later, that just returns status bits of the
device or an endpoint or an interface. Get the script there is also being used that for the
identification of the device, what kind of device is that, is that a master device,
is it a mouse, is it a keyboard, and so on, that there are a lot more, but these are not important.
Actually, for all purposes, only the get status request is important. A control transfer has a
standard layout, let's call it packet that is being sent over USB looks like this.
You have some kind of a request type that says, is this a read or a write, who do you want to
talk to the device or an endpoint, stuff like that. Then there is what do you actually want to do,
this tells the device stack, for example, if this isn't set address or get status or get the script
or request, and then there is some W value, it's a 16-bit value, that's just some payload that
depends on what the request and the request is. Then there is some W index, it's kind of the same,
just with a different name, and then there is optional, then there is a length that describes
the length of optional data that might be written or read from the device, depending on
if this is a read request or a write request to the device, and then either there is some data
here or there is no data here, so this is optional. This is what one of these RCM messages looks like,
it's basically just a C struct, the binary block that is being thrown over a bug endpoint to the
device and the whole stack and stuff. Here are some CMDs, download code, for example, is command
number fear, and all these version requests are 5, 6, and 7, for example. This rack contains all
the important things that the RCM code needs to know to verify that message, the signature of that
message, and what it's supposed to do. It has a length, how long is that complete packet,
or that complete command. Some crypto stuff here, we don't care because we don't care about the
crypto, and we can't break it anyway, it's RSA 2048, so no chance. Some device ID that needs to match,
it's a unique device ID per chip that needs to match, then there is the opcode, that's one of these
here, then there's the length again, but this time this is signed, so everything up to here is not
signed because you of course cannot sign the signature, because that's not possible, and because
you would have to modify the signature after signing it, so yeah, that doesn't make sense.
So here again is the length, this time signed, the length here is just convenience for the code,
so that the code just needs to read the first four bytes, and then it can expect that this packet
has a certain length, and then when it read past here, it compares that this length is equal to
this length, so that it is sure that nobody is tempered with it, because you can't change this
one because it's signed. Then there's a payload length, you can attach a payload down here,
that is for example if you want a download code, that's the code that you want to download,
and this is the length here, then there is a version that needs to match one of these here,
some arguments that you can supply, for example for download code, it's the address in the payload
to jump to, if you have an entry point that's maybe not in the beginning of the code, but
farther out, you can specify that here in the arguments and jumps there, and yeah,
something I don't know, it's most likely never used, some key index crypto stuff,
then look at it, then reverse it, some padding, and then follows the payload, then the payload
follows, that has a length described as a set by this field. The boot flow, that's some code,
just to give you a high level idea, just quickly going to describe, you don't have to
really be able to read this, just I'm going to highlight what the blocks do. The first thing it does
is it checks if you already read like the hardware ID, it tries to send your hardware ID,
and you have to read this as a first thing if you want to talk over ICM to the device.
If it doesn't succeed, it just tries again, and again, and again, and again, until it succeeds,
and then it succeeds, and then it sets the slack to break out of this loop. In between, because it
tries to send stuff all the time, it also has to handle control requests, because as I said earlier,
the bug endpoint transmissions and the control endpoint requests can be independent of each other,
they don't really have that much to do with each other, so both of these things have to be handled
after another, but they have to be handled. After that, we call a function that's called
RCM receive message, so we are essentially waiting for a message. After this has been sent to the
host, the host can prepare a message and send it over with a code you want to download, for example.
So we receive that message, after that, we check if that message is properly signed.
If it's signed, we validate a bunch of fields in there, for example, that these two length fields
are equal, if the code is not too much for us to actually jump to, and then we jump to a
function that's called RCM prod handle message, where it's jumping to the code or it's responding
with the version information that you requested and so on. And if that message actually tells you
to jump to some code, you break out of this outer while loop and then you return and then
the following code that called try to load from RCM is just going to jump into the code
that you just downloaded because this function checked everything for ability.
How do we receive messages? This is a very convoluted function in the ROM itself because it does
complicated stuff. It's receiving these RCM messages and what it does is it always does this using
two DMA buffers. So it always has one buffer where it receives the message into and that's somewhere
in memory. And it does this asynchronously. So what it does is it queues a read request from
this end point with a length of 0x4000 bytes because that's how big the DMA buffer in memory is.
So it kind of instructs the hardware. Everything that comes in from that
bulk end point, put this somewhere in memory up to a length of 0x4000 bytes. And then it goes on.
In the first loop, this again is a while loop. In the first loop, it's going to
determine that it needs to read more stuff because it hasn't received anything yet.
So it's going to skip this part. Then it's also going to skip this part more on that later.
And then it has to wait for the read request to finish because as I said, it's asynchronous.
It tries to process data at the same time while receiving the next
chunk of data at the same time. So here, if we set this read more flag,
which is here as well. So if we queued a transfer of these SCM messages,
it's going to wait here until that finished. When that finishes, it tells you how much it
actually received because the host can send less than 0x4000 bytes in a single packet.
And when it finishes, it returns here and goes back to this loop. So now it knows I have
x amounts of bytes read. So it sees if it has received enough, it says, okay, I don't need
anything anymore. So then it goes into this if, where it checks if it received less than 680 bytes
yet in total. The 680 bytes is important because this struct here is exactly 680 bytes.
So what it tries to do is it first reads this header of the message without the payload.
If it got more than four bytes, then it already has this length here. So it knows most likely how
much data and total it needs to receive or the message to be complete, including the payload.
So then it checks some fields in there. If the total amount of data it needs to receive is not too
long. And if that's not the case, it knows how much does it in total need to receive. And then
it goes into this if if it received more than 680 bytes at this point, we receive the header
already, that big struct, and parts of the payload already. So then it copies the payload also into
memory into a different place than this RCM message buffer. So this RCM message buffer is the header,
where it checks these lengths, for example. And this is at one place in the memory,
and the payload is in another place. We will see this later in another slide.
And if it received more than 600 bytes, so it has the header put into this one place,
it can start to receive the payload that is the code that we just want to jump into
that other place. And it goes on and on and on until it determined, okay, I received enough
bytes as determined by this length insecure. I don't need to receive anything anymore. I'm done
here, and it returns, and then in the outerline function, this one here, the one before, it can
check the signatures because it completely received the code. Okay. So to recap, this just
receives the message. It does some all kinds of sanity checks already, so that we don't overflow
anything, and puts the header into one place and the payload into another place.
This function does this asynchronously. So while waiting for this to finish,
oh yeah, here's here, for example, this is the memory that I talked about.
This is the, this S RAM that the, the ROM has as part of its memory.
Here is the, some, some handoff data on the VCT. The next bootloader needs this stuff,
so the bootloader just puts it there and tells the bootloader, yeah, I loaded you from
this device and so on. Then there are global variables.
Then here is the first DMA buffer. As I said, it uses two buffers. It always uses the first one,
then the second one, then the first one again. Here is the stack, and then here is the RCM payload
buffer. This is the code that we would jump into. So what the boot ROM does is the RCM message,
the 680 by 680 bytes here will be put here into the global variables, and the RCM payloads
following that message will be put here into unused memory that's never touched by the boot ROM,
except for this RCM payload download.
As I said earlier, you have to handle these control requests all the time.
When you, when this function before kicks off this asynchronous read and it waits for it to finish
and actually deliver data, it does this here in this function. So USB device read end point one
out complete, so it just waits for this transfer to complete. It does this in this while loop,
it checks some status of the USB end point, and if that status says, okay, I'm good,
then it breaks out of this loop here. If the buffer is ready or the end point is
installed at some USB thing to signal errors, then you can break out of this loop. Otherwise,
it just keeps looping and pulling the status, and while doing this, it needs to handle a pending
control transfer. And because that also does DMA, because it's also USB, it's going to use the
other DMA buffer. So we have these two DMA buffers. For example, this one here is right now used for
the byte transfer to receive the LCM message. And while it's filling that and waiting for it to be
full, it's using this buffer to potentially receive an answer to control requests at the same time
while waiting for the hardware to fill up the buffer. And then when it's done, it's going to switch
roles, and they're used vice versa. Yeah, so this is important. This does this all the time.
Now, let's look what that function does. That's a bit easier. It just handles the control
transfer. It receives stuff from the DMA buffer. It copies that over into some other buffer,
and it looked like this is the, this is what it receives, the request type, the request, so it
needs to determine what is it, what the host wants from me, and then prepare a response and send that
over in that function. So it just looks into all these fields. It looks at, oh, it's just a device
to host transfer. So that's the host want to read something. If so, what kind of request is this,
is this a status request, if we want to get the status of the device, we just call this
get device status function, put this into this variable here, per USB spec, this descriptor is
two bytes long, and then it sets this descriptor variable, which is pointer to the location of
the status. And what then happens is that down below here, a mem copy happens where that response,
this is the response that the host waits for on that control request, because it wants to get
the status. So we now have to copy that, that response, we want to send to the host into a DMA buffer,
and tell the USB stick, this DMA buffer needs to be sent out to the host now. So we do that
here. We mem copy that descriptor with that length that we set to two here, and this descriptor
into that DMA buffer, and then we kick off the transfer with that length. Easy. If we look at
another case here, we want to get the status of an endpoint. So they again fill this status variable
with some return value of the function that gets the endpoint status, and it sets the descriptor
length to something, why is this here two, and there's not. This here, this GUsBD request is the
same that it uses here to find out what the host wants. So this w length thing is controlled by the
host. So usually, this is always two, because the host just knows the status request is two,
two bytes long, so I just supplied two here. But this descriptor length here is used down below
in that mem copy, and we control that length. That means we can copy more than two bytes
using this mem copy function. So we are not only copying this variable that is on the stack here
into that buffer, but also everything that's behind it when we set this length to more than two.
If we supply two, we just copy copy that variable that status variable. If we supply four,
we copy that status variable plus two bytes that are behind the status variable on the stack.
And we can play around with this. So this is what that looks like. Again, here we have the
message that is completely uninteresting now. Here we have the payload that we downloaded,
and here we have the USB endpoint status variable. That's two bytes long. Scale is not correct.
So what does the copy operation look like? If we do the mem copy, it looks like this,
we copy these two bytes, the beginning of the DMA buffer, and that buffer then is past the
hardware the hardware is told sent us out to the host and magic happens.
But what if we copy eight kilobytes? If we set that W length to eight kilobytes,
then the mem copy operation is going to copy that variable plus 8190 bytes into that DMA buffer
from the stack. So we can leak stack and a bit of stuff that we sent over, but we still don't
have code execution. We can only read the stack, but the stack is directly behind the DMA buffer.
So we always copy stuff from here to here. What would happen if we copy 16 kilobytes plus 12
kilobytes from here to here? Like this. We overwrite the stack. And the interesting thing is on the stack,
the stack in the C language is used if you do a function call to the mem copy, for example,
in a function, then the CPU needs to save where it needs to go on after that function is done.
And this is saved from the stack. This is called the return pointer. And when we can
overwrite the stack, we can overwrite the return pointer and just change this return pointer. We
don't have it to jump back into the code that called the mem copy, but we can put some pointer
there and just jump into the code. We don't load it here. And this happens before the
signature can be checked, because what we do is this is the main function, then we jump into this
RCM thing. These are all the function names that are that are called in sequence. So we have this
tryload from our Cm call, then we have this RCM receive message where it puts the header in
one place and the payload in the other place. We then wait for a transfer to complete.
And the transfer never completes because we just send, we just tell the boot drum with that
length field that we want to send, I don't know, 20 kilobytes of data, but we only send 19 kilobytes.
And or 20 kilobytes minus one byte. And then it then we just stop sending stuff.
So it's going to wait in this function for the last transfer to complete. And in the meantime,
it also has to handle these control transfers. At that point, we send this get status control
request with that overly long w length value that we can control. So we take a bunch of our payload,
copy it over the stack. And then the mem copy is done. The mem copy would return to this function
because of the saved return pointer on the stack, which we overwrote, but it never does this because
we overwrote that that return pointer, and we can jump to our payload. And we can just put our code
in there. And all this happens before any kind of signatures are checked, because this code
still receives the message. When we when we overwrite that pointer, it still thinks it doesn't have
the complete message. So it never returns from this RCM receive message function. And then RCM
receive message function comes before RCM message validate signatures. So we don't even need a
signature because it's never checked. And yeah, we just we just put our code
here into that RCM payload. And yeah, we can use this RCM to execute our own code without any kind
of signature checks. This is the bug that has been found by all of these parties that were on
Twitter and talking about this. And we found this as well 30 minutes before it was published.
I already had the text editor open. I'm trying to write an exploit, but yeah, then I saw the
message. So what do we need to do to exploit the thing? We connect to USB. We have to read that
ECE ID because that's the protocol. We then download code with that invalid signature into the into
the memory with the right header and then the payload. We never finished a download. That means
we actually set the length to a higher value than what we actually sent. And then when we
are done sending our payload, we just issue that get status control transfer with an overly large
W length. The mem copy happens. It gets copied over the stack. We control mem copy's return
pointer. And we captured the flow of control. Profit. One last slide. How do you get into RCM,
relatively easy. There are three possibilities. You already have kernel code execution due to
some other hack. And you can just set this PMC scratch register and reboot. And then it
ROM sees this and just goes into the RCM path. You rip off the EMC board and it can't boot.
It has no other chance than to go into RCM so we can exploit it. Or you press a magic button
combination while turning on the device. The magic button combination is configurable,
either it's volume up or volume up at the home button while turning the thing on.
The switch is configured for the letter. So the home button doesn't exist. But failoverflow found out
that here on the side on the right joy con where this joy con actually connects down here to some
pins, there is this pin for the home button. So they 3D printed this thing on the right that fits
exactly into the slot. We just have this bridge. So you put this thing in, you press the home button,
your whole plus turn it on and you're in RCM and you can launch the exploit.
I don't know if you can already buy these in China somewhere. You can just print it. I
printed one of these and hacked the thing that they glued into there as part of a USB connector.
So you can just cut this up, solder the two pins together. This is the first and the
fourth pin I think of a micro USB connector. So you just sacrifice a cable
and curse a lot because it's just fiddly and then you have your own of these jigs. That's it.
If you want to know more about this, there are more resources. I linked this on the slides here.
The first one is the fussell launcher. That's one of the exploits that got published shortly after
the buck was public. It also has a nice write-up. If that code thing that I explained to you was
too fast for you or too convoluted, you can read up the write-up there by Kate Tampkin. It's
actually a pretty good write-up. And the second one is shaweil too. That's the same buck but a
different exploit from failoverflow. They released it shortly after. They also ported Linux so you
can look at the reposters. You can run Linux on the switch. So yeah, questions?
I don't think you know which part has been used or do you just like extend the jump slide that
thing to offer the same? Yeah, so the question is how do we know which buffer of these two is
being used? You can just count how many USB transfers you do. So the question is which
of these two buffers are used because in my mem copy here, I always assumed that the second
buffer is being used and I copied that over here. You could also do this with the first buffer but
then I mean the space here is big enough. It covers all of these three buffers. So you could,
for example, just copy this here over to here and overwrite the first buffer, the second buffer,
and then the stack. But it is not necessary. You can do both but in what you do is because these
things are used in sequence. So the first transfer this buffer is used and the second
USB transfer this buffer is used and the third buffer and the third transfer this is used again.
You can just count how many USB packets you send and then you know when you use buffer two or buffer
one. If you are currently in buffer one and you want to execute what want to switch to buffer two,
you can just send another byte of the bug endpoint, for example, and then this buffer is being used
and then it switches over to the second buffer. And that's actually exactly what that Fuse exploit
code does. The code, if you if you want to try to understand the exploit, definitely look at the
Fuse launcher exploit not at the shovel too because this code quality is pretty good. It's written in
Python and you it's a breeze to read this shovel too while being a cool exploit because it launches
core boot and everything to prepare everything for running Linux. It's also exploit quality code.
If you read that it looks like an actual exploit which is a bit convoluted usually because
you write that exploit and you don't care how it looks like after it works.
Yeah, thank you.
