API URL: https://api.media.ccc.de/public/recordings/4501
Frontend URL: https://media.ccc.de/v/c4.openchaos.2014.09.unicode
Title: Unicode

Okay, so welcome to the KS Computer Club in Cologne for everybody who's here the first
time, toilets are straight through the door, drinks are in the fridge, like just through
the door to the left, prices are outside the fridge, labeled.
Yeah, we are on Thursdays, we're a public hacker space, like everybody can come here,
the the phone, it's a lot of fun.
the other thing, I'm going to talk about the internet.
When are two strings actually equivalent for some definition of equivalent, and things
that play into that is encodings, like to make it bit by bit equivalent, normalizing the string,
checking for characters that are in some way confusable between each other, and there are
some other special characters that you have to pay special attention to, anyway.
So by me, my name is Fluggen Sides, or Florop around these parts, we're usually all these
these are nicknames here.
I'm Master of Science in Electrical Engineering,
specialized in computer engineering.
I usually do lots of things with XMPP,
also some systems programming, kind of a C, an enthusiast,
also object to C, and rust lately.
So history of Unicode.
I thought it would make sense to sort of see why
Unicode is something that you want to have take two steps
back and start at the beginning.
So one of the first encodings that is today,
still used on computers, was ASCII.
And ASCII was published in 1963 by the American Standards
Association, which is today called ANSI,
so the American National Standards Institute,
and was originally sort of designed for data types.
So if you're not familiar with that, which is likely today,
That's basically what you'd call an electronic type writer.
So you have this sort of typewriter-like system
that also electronic solutions meets the data that's typed.
And it's a seven-bit character encoding.
Even though today it's usually stored in, well, bytes,
rock tats, which have eight bits,
but the high bit is always zero.
It is logically based on encodings
that was used on teletypes,
and it can with seven bits encode 128 characters.
That is, you have which are control characters,
some of them for today rather obscure,
because they were necessary for teletypes.
Like few people even though it actually works,
use a ballot control character,
which would actually ring a ballot
on the other end of the nine.
And then there's 95 printable characters.
Like the usual alphabet,
exclamation marks that kind of thing.
And the first commercial use of ASCII was actually
in an AT&T teletype write exchange system.
So a network where such teletypes would connect
and interchange data.
And you might be familiar with this.
This is basically the whole big ASCII table,
on 128 characters.
And it starts out with like a lot of the controls
and then you have loads of printable characters
in dance with delete.
So then they're not only people
in like America and England, right?
a couple of things.
So you have a lot of different things.
So you have a lot of different things.
And you have a lot of different types of characters
that you have to use.
And you have a lot of different types of characters
that you have to use.
So you have a lot of different types of characters
that you have to use.
So you have a lot of different types of characters
that you have to use.
So you have a lot of different types of characters
that you have to use.
So you have a lot of different types of characters
that you have to use.
So you have a lot of different types of characters
that you have to use.
So you have a lot of different types of characters
that you have to use.
So you have a lot of different types of characters
that you have to use.
So you have a lot of different types of characters
that you have to use.
So you have a lot of different types of characters
that you have to use.
The brackets are actually the Umaud A and the Umaud U.
So each time you type the curly bracket,
you would actually see on your display in A,
which is not exactly pleasant to read.
And I don't know if anyone is familiar with trigraphs and C.
Trigraphs are pretty much a combination of series
characters that gets replaced with things like a curly bracket.
And the whole point of that was so that it would be nicer
for users of these systems to program C,
because you would not see this strange Umaud character,
but at least you would say some sensible trigraph.
So you had your characters, but there were other problems.
And then some would later, like some might remember, 1987,
there was an ISO standard.
And the first time that was actually-- well, probably
not the first time, but that was actually
an 8-bit character encoding.
So you had twice the amount of characters
that you could encode.
And again, it has different variants,
depending on the region it was meant for.
So you have, in total, 16 parts specified,
each part handling a different region of the world.
So part one is the one that would usually be used here.
There's later been replaced by part 15,
which introduces nice things like a Euro sign
instead of a generic currency sign.
And the first one in 28 characters
actually kept equivalent to what it is in ASCII.
So they are completely compatible.
If you have ASCII, you can just decode it as ISO
at f9 in any variant of it, actually,
and still get the ASCII characters out.
And then there's Unicode.
And Unicode sort of comes up as a need for a universal character
encoding, the idea that you don't
have to switch between 16 different parts to one standard
and know which of the 16 different parts of the standard
you're talking with and you're interpreting,
they actually know which character you have.
So you have a universal character mapping
between a number and actually a character or a theme
that you can identify.
The first version of that was published in 1991.
It already supported 24 different scripts
with 7,161 characters total.
And it limited itself to 16 bits.
So you could encode 65,536 characters.
And the idea was that this should be enough for everyone.
We can't squeeze all the perfumes
of the world in there and be all right.
So not too much later, like they had
tried to put a lot of Han characters
and Chinese characters in there.
And they released the version 2.0 in 1996,
which supported only one script more,
but already more than twice as much characters, 38, 950.
And they got the idea that, well, maybe 16 bits are not
enough for everyone.
So this was extended.
Unicode, and even today Unicode still
uses 28 bits at most.
And it's actually not fully 21 bits.
You get 1,114,112 possible code points.
And the way to calculate that is you have 17 so-called planes,
which you can choose with the first five bits.
So you switch between a plane.
And inside that plane, you have 2 to the power
of 16 different code points.
So that number is actually 2 to the power of 16 times 17
planes, and not times 2 to the power of 5.
And this year, Unicode 7.0 was released.
And it's come a long way.
Like we have 123 scripts now.
We have 113,021 characters, which is already more than you
could represent with 16 bits, right?
Yeah.
Still no Klingon.
Still no Klingon.
Still no Klingon, no.
Only another official Klingon standard, yes.
That might actually be the correct slide to talk about that.
This is a rundown of the planes that are currently
in use and defined.
The first one is the basic multilingual plane,
which is, yes, for basic multilingual.
So the most common characters are in there.
A lot of the Chinese, Japanese, Korean characters
are actually in there.
A lot of the variants are in there.
Obviously, all of the Latin alphabet is in there.
I'm loud.
That kind of things.
Then there's a supplementary multilingual plane,
which has some less-so-used multilingual characters,
like from completely different scripts also collected.
And then plane 2 has supplementary idiographic characters.
So that's all sorts of other mixed together Chinese,
Japanese, Koreans, CJK characters that are not used that often.
Playing 3 to 13 are actually currently
unassigned and unused, just empty.
And you have plane 14, which is a supplementary special purpose
plane, which has all sorts of different, mostly controlled
characters, so I think, that didn't fit into the BMP
or that didn't seem necessary at the time where
most BMP code ones were assigned.
And then a plane is 50 and 60 in order
to private use code planes.
So in principle, fonts actually assign characters to that.
So this is private use.
There is no definition for what characters at what code point.
But it can be used in private spaces
if you control the font.
Or fonts can actually use it to store ligatures and tell
your interpreters that the characters FL are linked to
something in its private use plane.
And there is, talking about Lingon,
a standard that says these private use code points
should be used for these Lingon characters, which
is not officially like ratified by the Unicode consortium,
but which exists to have a semi-interrupt way for people
who, for some reason, want to encode Lingon and Unicode.
So talking about encodings.
So as I said, Unicode assigns each character a unique number.
But there are still different ways
to store numbers on the hardest, right?
And Unicode itself specifies currently
three different so-called Unicode transformation formats,
so forms of encoding to store these numbers, which
are ut of 8, ut of 6, and ut of 32.
And the number at the end of this ut of specifies
how many bits are in a basic code unit.
So the smallest representable unit in that encoding
has 8, 16, or 32 bits.
And what that encodes is something
that conceptually is called the Unicode scalar value.
That is different from a code point,
because it includes the range from 0x D800 to DFFF.
And the reason for that is that these code points are
so-called surrogates.
And the reason you need surrogates
and what surrogates are will become apparent in two slides.
But for now, just remember, Unicode scalar values
excludes a certain range, which is
at the rather end of the basic multi-lingual plane.
So the first encoding is ut of 8,
and the currently most widely spent encoding.
It's basic coding as a set of 8 bits.
So the smallest thing you can encode is 8 bits long.
If you need more than one byte--
so these 8 bits to encode the number you're
trying to encode to encode the code point--
the leading ones in the very first byte of the encoding
of that code point signify how long that sequence is going to be.
If this seems confusing, now there's
a slight that makes this a lot clearer.
And then each further byte starts with the sequence 1, 0.
It's completely backwards compatible with 7-bit ASCII,
because if you use a single byte, the first bit of that
has to be 0, because otherwise you
would be signifying that you're using more than one
byte to represent the character.
And then for everything, you can encode in two bytes.
You'll agree to the next 20 characters.
With three bytes, you have the whole rest of the BMP.
So you can encode 16 bits in Utilate.
And that includes most of the Chinese-Japanese-Korean
characters.
So keep that in mind, you need three bytes for most of CJK.
And with four bytes, you have the whole 21 bits
that you can have at maximum for Unicode.
So the way this encoding looks-- and this
is the-- that makes it clearer, hopefully,
slide as it was talking about-- is this.
So this is the ASCII-compatible part,
like you have a leading 0.
And then you have 7 bits completely equivalent
to what ASCII would do.
Also, the numbers are completely equivalent
to what ASCII would do.
If you need more than one byte, you have two leading 1 bits.
And then you have a 0.
Or for three bytes, you have three leading 1 bits and a 0.
Or for four bytes, four leading 1 bits and then a 0.
And each continuation byte, as I said, starts with 0, 1.
And then the rest is used for the actual code point
encoding, which gives you an order 7, 11, 16, and 21 bits.
In theories, this actually scales further.
And I think the original standard actually
includes first a variance, like with 5 leading 1, 6 leading 1,
7 leading 1, 6 leading 1, so I think after that,
it doesn't make sense anymore.
But since Unicode is currently restricted to 21 bits,
it doesn't exactly make sense to ever use more than four bytes.
And they actually point out that the most you can ever
use to encode a character in any of the three encodings
is 4 bytes per code point.
And it is UTF-16, where the smallest possible unit is 16 bit.
Obviously, this is no longer compatible with ASCII
because even if you have a small number, like, I don't know,
20 or something for a space or x20,
I think, you still have to fill the rest of the bits with 0.
So you always have 0 bytes, if you would interpret this as ASCII.
And all Unicode scalar values up to, like,
FFFF were encoded using a single of those coordinates,
16 bits, and just straight as the number.
That means for the whole BMP, including most of CJK,
you have to use only two bytes, which is a reason why,
actually, a lot of Asian countries are big proponent
of using UTF-16 or UTF-8, because it saves you a whole byte.
I told you to remember that in UTF-8,
you usually need three bytes to encode anything
that is in CJK.
If you have anything above that, you obviously
need two code units to encode it.
And the way to do that, which is a bit of a hack,
is you use specially assigned code points that are in the BMP,
and those are the so-called surrogate pairs.
And that's the very reason they also are not included
in the Unicode scalar values to represent them.
So you have two of the surrogate pairs,
and some of the bits in those pairs actually
represent the code point.
And this is the way that it looks like if you have the code
point that has this bit representation, so it always--
yes, it's 21 bits.
The use here represent which plane to choose,
so that goes from 0 up to 16.
And then the rest of that is the code point within the plane.
And then you map that to two separate surrogate pairs.
One of them starts with the 8 to DC, I think,
and the other one well, with something else.
And that's a high surrogate and a low surrogate.
And in that first one, you encode the plane,
except you can use the number of the plane minus 1.
Because if you were actually using plane 0,
you would have an encoding where you don't use surrogate pairs,
because you can fit it in a single-code unit.
So you can get rid of encoding plane 0 explicitly
and just shift everything down by 1, which
takes your whole bit in this case.
Oh, yeah, then I think it's still appropriate to talk
about UCS2.
UCS2 is a two-byte encoding.
It's basically very similar to the UCS16,
except you never have the surrogate pairs case.
You always only use 16-bit, which
means that everything else that the basic modeling group
pain plainly can't be encoded.
This is what was suggested in, I guess, Unicode 1 and 1.0 1
and everything before 2.0, because people
were assuming that it would only ever grow to 16-bit.
So it's a fixed-length encoding, which makes it sort of nicer.
You can index efficiently, but you
can represent a lot of the characters that actually
part of Unicode.
And for that very reason, it's being
deprecated in Unicode 2.0, not for some reason,
because standardization was such at the time.
ECMAScript, or probably better known as JavaScript
the most, may use this as an encoding.
And I'm not actually sure how much implementations do this,
but people are constantly telling you
that you have to be aware of UCS2 if you're using JavaScript.
Technically, what the standard says
is you can use easier UCS2 or UTF16.
And if you're not sure, use UTF16,
but it is completely allowed to sort of forbid
most of the higher Unicode planes in an ECMAScript string.
And then there's UTF32, which is pretty straightforward,
because it's just encoding your code point
as an unsigned 32-bit value, like straight integer, which
reads that the highest byte of that integer is always 0,
because we're only using 21 bits.
So everything after the 24th bit is obviously 0,
which is the high byte.
And it's the only officially still
recombinant fixed-width encoding.
And as I said, fixed-width encoding
means you can efficiently index a string stored like that.
Like if you want the tenth character with UTF8,
you have to actually parse it and see where the character
boundaries are, because you don't know how many bytes it took.
With this fixed-width encoding, you
can just say, OK, I want the tenth character that's 10 times
4, and read it at that byte offset.
If you're a bit into systems programming,
you have probably, at one point or another,
had to deal with endiness, which is basically
the order of bytes that a system uses.
And with any encoding but UTF8, you
have to take care of this, because you
don't know if UTF16 is stored with the high byte
of the low byte first, or if UTF32 starts with the significant
byte or the most significant byte.
So the way to do that, usually, is
beginning a document with the 0 with no break space, which
is a character that usually is used to join two words together
such that they won't perform a line break between them.
So you can use it as a very beginning of a document
that you don't see any difference.
And if you use it like that, it's called a byte order mark,
or a bomb.
So first thing you can do with that is obviously detect byte
order, so it's encoded F-E-F-F.
So if what you read is F-F-F-E, this is little Indian.
If what you read is F-E-F-F, that's big Indian.
The other thing you can do with this is, oh, for that very
reason, the other codeporn, like F-F-F-E,
is actually unassigned.
So it's used to just differentiate whether this is
little or big Indian.
The other thing you can do with this is detect the encoding,
because in each of the three different encodings,
it looks different, right?
In UTF-8, it's three bytes total, and none of them--
well, if you read the first two, you
know that it's not any of the other encodings.
In UTF-32, you see that it starts with two zero bytes,
and then these bytes, and you have 16 hits,
pretty much literally the code point.
So the I-T-F, just like as a reference point,
actually discourages the use of the bomb in their protocols.
Like they say, either just use UTF-8,
because it's nice, or have a separate mechanism
to signal, which encodings use, also taking it to account
that it might not be a Unicode encoding at all.
So as a small summary, UTF-8 usually,
if you're encoding any text in it,
ends up being the smallest encoding for that in scripts,
because most of it can usually be encoded in a single byte.
Indexing is rather expansive, because you still need to parse
the whole string to actually count characters.
UTF-16, if you're writing Chinese, Japanese, Korean,
usually ends up being the smallest for that text.
Indexing is still sort of expensive.
You can step in bigger chunks, but you still
have to parse characters in order to know how many you've
already read.
It does have vast decoding over it, then you deviate there.
And then UTF-32 is obviously wasteful,
because one byte is always completely unused,
but it's very efficient for indexing.
So if you have to jump within your string
and take substrings of it, it's a good encoding
for that, potentially.
And it's obviously trivial d2d code,
because it's just a representation of that very number.
So normalization, starting with the problem.
You have a string, why do you need to normalize it?
And the reason is that different code point sequences
in Unicode are considered equivalent.
And there are two kinds of this, like one is canonical
equivalence, so you have two sequences.
They are the same, they are displayed the same,
and they are also usually interpreted the same.
And they have compatibility equivalence,
which two strings are considered equivalent.
But they may completely differ in display
and be different, the interpreted depending
on the context they show up in.
So to make that a bit more obvious here is a slide showing
different versions of canonical equivalence.
So what this is, this is like your usual b,
your usually uppercase a.
On the right side, you have b and a, a, as standalone code
points, and the last one is a so-called combining character.
So it combines with the character that stood before it,
so it generates completely the same glyph.
It looks exactly the same as the one on the left side,
but it's still different data.
Similarly, with one below you have like a decorating mark
below and above it, which both combine onto the queue.
So you get a dot below and above the queue,
but they could be in a different order.
So you have to somehow make sure that these mouse
are still compare equivalent no matter what the order is.
And then the last one is just on the left,
you have the ohm sign, like for measuring resistance.
The right is the omega sign, which are logically different,
but they are obviously the same.
They display the same, the preferred representation
is actually using the omega sign.
So you need some way, if you have two different strings,
to perform normalization so that you actually
can compare them byte by byte to tell
whether there is the same or not.
A bit more crass with compatibility equivalence,
which does things that seem a bit less intuitive,
like it removes fractals, makes h into a proper h,
it removes circles from numbers.
Oh yeah, this is pretty much, it looks like two characters
in one, which is still equivalent in some sense
to them on their own, like just a D is that,
and then a combining mark, but in the strip there,
it's actually meant for this is a single character,
so splitting that apart makes no sense at all.
So for that reason, it's just compatibility equivalent,
but not actually equivalent equivalent.
So with that in mind, you get four different forms
to perform this normalization.
So they're called, very catchy names, D, C, K, C and K, D.
Usually, when people talk about it, they say,
okay, this is normalize to N, F, D, N, F, C, N, F, K, D,
N, F, K, D, K, C.
And there, like in order, the first one
is canonical decomposition, so what you try to do there
is you split letters apart as much as possible.
So if you have, A with the irises on top,
you split that apart into A, combining the irises.
If you have a C with a cedilla below,
you split it up in C and combining cedilla.
And F, K, D does pretty much the same thing,
but also, there's compatibility decomposition,
which does those a bit more drastic things,
like two with circle around it decomposes into just a two.
I think the ellipsis sign, so three dots decomposes into
dot, dot, dot.
The jig character, the dz thing we have there,
decomposes into dz, combining mark and those kinds of things.
And then there are the two forms N, F, C and N, F, K, C,
which also perform composition.
And composition is always canonical,
so you never can go back from dz and a combining mark
to just a single character.
But you can go back to d and z with a die critical method.
And yeah, basically the forms are just,
you do whichever type of decomposition you wanted to do,
then you recompose it into a canonical form.
So how do you actually do decomposition?
It's basically a table lookup.
Like the Unicode character database contains two entries
per character, the canonical decomposition
of the compatibility decomposition.
Compatibility decomposition might be empty,
and I think so can be the canonical one
if it's just the character itself.
And it potentially maps a single code point
to multiple code points.
Like we saw that before, one character can be mapped
to a character in the combining mark, those kinds of things.
And actually to sort of safe space in this table,
some characters decompose into something
that's again decomposable.
So you have to iterate this algorithm
until nothing decomposes anymore.
If you do compatibility decomposition,
each of these entries actually specifies
the type of compatibility decomposition.
And I won't go through them all,
but some of the more obvious ones
like circle decomposition
is removing a circle around a number,
like what we saw before, right?
Or, I don't know, I think font is the thing
we saw with the age and fracture
becoming a usual age character.
And then as a part of decomposition,
you also get what's called the canonical sorting algorithm.
So as I said before, if you have a character
and then multiple combining marks after that,
you somehow need to make sure
that the combining marks get a fixed order
so that you can compare them.
Like it doesn't really matter what they order,
they are as the character still looks the same,
but in order to compare it,
they need to get a certain order.
And in order to make that possible,
each character, each combining character
has a canonical combining class.
So that's basically a number, I think 8-bit number,
and you basically just sort them by that number,
like between so-called starters.
So an A, for example, would be a starter
where you can combine it with something,
but it does not itself combine with something before that.
And between starters, you have combining characters,
and among those, you sort them by the combining class.
And that gives you a string that you can actually compare
and get a consistent result between strings
that look the same, right?
So you want to do composition, as I said,
before it's only canonical,
and it always works on pairs of code points.
So I think what the algorithm tells you to do,
which is not necessarily most efficient ways,
you start at the second character,
and then you seek backwards.
And look, okay, can that be combined?
And can that be combined means,
is there a decomposition that maps to these two characters?
And if that's possible, then you do that,
replace it with that.
Again, look at the second character.
If it's not possible, go to the next character,
and seek backwards, checking that character
against each one before it,
whether they can be combined,
if it can be replaced, and that's the other thing.
Yeah, oh, and with that algorithm obviously,
if you have composed the code points,
so if two code points composed into a thing on one,
that new code point can obviously be composed again
with something coming after that.
So if you have, let's say, an A is usual character,
and then two combining marks,
you combine with the first combining mark,
but then you still have to look
where there's another one that you can also combine
onto that character to get a new glyph,
or a new code point.
And even if you,
so the string can, even if it sort of looks like,
okay, there's nothing I can do,
can still change you to the ordering of combining marks.
Like if you write, the D was a dot above,
and then a dot below.
There's such no way to combine both of them together,
but if you decomposes into a single D and then a dot above,
and you reorder it by the ordering algorithm,
the two combining marks which places.
So when you then try to compose them back together,
the D is going to be composed
with the dot below instead of the dot above,
because of the ordering of the combining marks.
Let me just keep in mind, decomposition can enlarge strings.
They can become immensely bigger.
This is sort of the extreme example,
like the usual maximum is like one character becomes five.
This is for a very specific code point,
and only happens if you do compatibility decomposition.
And that's the Arabic piece B upon him,
which is sort of uttered after the name of a prophet quite often.
So it actually has a single code point, FDFA,
which actually looks like this.
Doesn't seem like that should be a single code point,
but it is.
And if you do compose that,
you get these 18 code points in order,
which are just the separate characters of that phrase.
But it's something to give you in mind also for storage.
Like if you store data,
it might make sense to rather store it in NFC
because it becomes smaller rather than NFD.
So something to talk about separately is Hangul.
And I'm probably pronouncing that terribly, but anyway.
So this is the Korean script or Korean alphabet.
It's sort of interesting.
They have 24 separate letters.
So not that many, like 24 has less than an hour alphabet
called Yammo.
And these consists of 14 consonants and 10 vowels, okay?
But it's written in blocks.
So as you see on the slide, this is actually Hangul in Hangul.
So this isn't, well, H, A and N, not really, but sort of.
And this is a G and O.
So each of these blocks are actually like three characters.
And they are a code point on their own.
Like each block has a code point.
So if you want to do decomposition or composition
and do that via a table, your table would just explode
because basically you have to do each combination
of those 24 characters in blocks of three.
That's not technically completely true.
Like some of those are just not possible.
And I think each block has to contain one consonant,
but cannot contain, no, can contain more than one,
but has to contain at least one consonant
and things like that.
But if you do that with tables, they quickly become huge.
So the way Unicode gets around that is,
okay, so the question is, can we do better?
The way Unicode gets around that is by ordering
all those characters in a sensible order.
So the YAMU are ordered in such a way
that you can, just with performing simple aerodynamics,
compute which block a combination of two or three YAMU generates.
And I'm not going to go through it in detail,
but the better idea is you have these predefined constants,
which is like start of the syllables,
start of the leading YAMU, vowel YAMU and trailing YAMU.
So characters that can be at the beginning of a block
in somewhere in the middle or at the end of a block.
And then how many of those there are
and some like multiples of that.
And for decomposition, you just basically get an index
within the set of syllables.
Like this is the answer syllable.
And from that you can, with modular and division arithmetic,
just compute the indexes of each of the YAMU contains.
And they seem pretty much the other way around.
Like if you have a leading and a vowel,
you can compute the block that that would be.
Or if you already have something composed,
so leading and vowel composed.
And then a trailing one you want to compose onto that
is basically just an addition of the index as a trailing one.
So they're sort of nicely ordered
so that you can just do very simple arithmetic
to get the result instead of having huge tables.
Okay, so let's get to confusable characters.
And again, the problem is sort of nothing new
for most of you, I guess.
Like Eucote does not encode glyphs.
So glyphs means the way a certain character
looks, which is obvious, like there are different fonts.
The same code point in different fonts
may look different, perfectly natural.
And many of the characters actually look very, very similar
or identical, even if you use just one font.
And that sort of enables an attack of impersonation.
Like if you're in a chat room, you can impersonate people
by giving yourself a nickname that looks very, very similar
to the one he has.
Or you could craft a domain like something
that looks very, very similar to papal.com
to google.com, like something critical.
Or you could craft a local part,
so the part before they get an email address
or jabber address or whatever.
And make that look there because it's a certain person.
And then send an email to someone else.
Or maybe a perfectly legitimate account, right?
But it just looks like it's a certain person,
but the actual account is a completely different one.
And here's some example that you might actually
know some of them.
Like Juliet, you have two versions which look
very, very similar if you don't like squint your eyes
a bit, but which are on the left with an L
and then you're right instead of the L, it's a one.
So that's the very, very typical one
that I've used in ASCII, right?
And that's within the same script.
Like this is just Latin.
This is a Latin numeral one.
This is a Latin, smaller, lowercase, letter Rau.
And they look pretty much the same.
And then you can do that which makes scripts
like take a curlic P and I think it's not actually supposed
to be pronounced P, I think it's R or something.
But it looks the same like the X and Z and P, right?
So it both reads as Peter, but it's not Peter.
And then the last one is actually
you can create strings that look completely the same,
but all of the characters are actually not from the same script.
So the last one is actually all shiruki characters.
That's not a single Latin character.
But it looks pretty much the same as the one on the right,
which is all Latin characters.
And in this case, I made it a bit--
I used different fonts and things, right?
Like the first one is like a turbulent font.
So they would actually look similar.
And the last one I made sure that the Latin one actually
had serifs because the shiruki script,
even if you render it in a song font,
has these serify extensions of the letters.
So solutions.
There's not really a straightforward one.
And people are making a point of making it very, very clear
that there is no real solution to this problem.
Like it is on some level of social problem.
And fixing it-- well, if anything,
it would require glyph encoding.
So actually encoding into a number
how a character looks, which for obvious reason just
doesn't scale.
So there are some possibilities.
If you're running a service, if you're running a certain department,
you can restrict the scripts you allow.
If you're running a service in Germany or in the UK,
you can say, OK, I only allow the Latin script.
I won't allow any CJK characters, anything,
shiruki or anything because I expect my users to be German.
And if someone wants something else,
you should go to a local provider and, OK,
we'll federate with them, but they should not use our service.
Which at least avoids the mixed script and whole string
script versions of that attack, right?
It still has one and L looking similar, but that's maybe not as bad.
You can, if you have too much time on your hands,
obviously that all identifies that someone tries to register with you,
which might be plausible if it's actually
like a standard and limited list or if you're, I don't know,
the yanner and maintaining a registry,
which, anyway, will only ever get 50 entries or whatever.
But usually, that's not really plausible.
And then there's an algorithm called
the Unicode Confusable Detection, which is obviously not perfect,
but is what I'm going to present as a better-than-nothing solution sort of.
So what do you do with Unicode Confusable Detection?
You create what they call a skeleton of the string.
So a skeleton in the sense of this is the bare bones of it.
This is basically what it looks like, right?
And if two strings have the same skeleton, they are considered confusable.
So in some sense, equivalent looks the same to a person.
And the way to do that is that there's a table in a separate file
actually confuses, we'll start the TXT in the Unicode folder,
which contains mappings from a code point to whatever
it should be in the skeleton.
And there are actually four types of that.
Like you can do that for a single script.
Just mapping it to the same script can do that with mixed scripts,
where they take into account, obviously making the table a lot bigger,
taking into account things that are confusable when you're using different scripts.
And then you can do that for either just lower case identifiers or any case.
So lower case, upper case, and title case characters.
So how do you compute such a skeleton?
So first thing you do is you put them into normalization form D.
So full canonical decomposition.
And the main reason to do that is that way in the table,
you only have to decompose characters, right?
So you can make your table possibly a lot smaller.
Because you never have to deal with an A, so an R oom-loud.
You just have to deal with a single R and the combining data
critics that uses on their own maybe.
And then each of that decomposed code points.
You map according to the table, whichever one you choose.
And then on the result, you can apply NFD.
And that last NFD step is not actually for decomposition,
but is to sort the combining marks in a proper order.
Because if you mapped one of the code points to combining marks,
those could be in a different order than it would be specified by NFD.
So you have to re-sort them.
In order to get the comparison to the proper.
So here's some examples of what that does for the strings
we had before.
So this is Juliet with the Allen with the one.
And at this time, I used the font where it's a bit more clear
that this is an Allen with the one, right?
And they both mapped to just Juliet with now.
Also, St. Peter in the Cherokee font maps to just Latin characters,
S-T-P-E-T-E-R, and maps to Latin one again.
So if you create the skeleton, you very, very easily see
that these are actually the same in some way,
so that these are confusable.
So maybe I should talk about this more.
This is sort of a way that one can use on deployments.
I think it was originally created actually for a domain name
registration, where registers wanted
to be able to see if someone trying to register a domain, which
is confusable with something that we already have,
is someone trying to imitate papal, for example.
I personally wrote a module for Prodigy and XMPP server
that would create skeletons for each registered user,
and then put a new registration check whether the user name someone
chooses is confusable with that one.
Unfortunately, I've never actually seen hard numbers
and how well this algorithm does.
Like, I'm not sure how easy it is to trick.
I have not personally been able to trick it,
like if you just scroll through the Unicode database,
like, OK, this looks like Latin characters and put it
into the algorithm.
It actually maps that to the Latin characters.
So it's not completely bad.
It's not trivial to trick.
But obviously, people might have overlooked something.
If you have control over the font that a user sees,
it's obviously very trivial to still get characters
to look like each other, right?
But in general, it's an easy approach step
to do such things.
So special characters.
This is sort of-- these are not a lot of the characters
that are, in some way, special.
This is, I think, four or four categories
that are found noteworthy because you often
feel like you have to treat them, especially,
or something like that.
The first one is to zero with non-joiner.
And well, let's first get to the problem.
The problem is this is invisibly in many situations,
actually, in most situations.
Like, you put that in a string and it's zero with nothing.
Like, you just don't see that it's there.
But it means that your strings will be different
because there's an additional code point.
For that reason, in many algorithms,
to compare identifiers, one of the steps is mapping zero
with non-joiner to nothing.
So just throwing it away when it's in a string.
The reason it actually exists is it
seems to break up ligatures.
Like, I don't know if you can see that.
But here in the general world, Alf Lager,
this is the ligature between F and L,
so they're joint up here, which is topographically incorrect
because that's a composed word from Alf and Lager.
So you need to have space there.
So if you put zero with non-joiner there,
you get the typographically correct version of that.
And then the examples for a version are a bit more like--
you'd need to know that even if you're not a typograph.
This is apparently IBM, like the company named Arabic.
And usually, like, it creates this fancy ligatures
between characters here in the middle,
whereas it should be those two two as are pronounced I,
this is a B, and those two together are the M.
So the insert here with non-joiners here and here,
to split that up into like three separate sounds.
The person, one, is, I think, I wish, translated.
And the thing there is that, grammatically, apparently,
there is-- like, this particle represents
that this is present.
And in modern grammatically, this is apparently
no longer joint to the rest of the word for readability
purposes.
But your characters would usually do that,
as you can see on the left.
So you have to insert a zero with non-joiner there.
And those are sort of the different reasons
you might want to add these in different scripts.
There's also a reason you might want to allow these
for identifiers if you actually support that script,
like making IBM able to spell the company correctly
might be a good thing, depending on their use case.
But generally, it's one of the more dangerous characters.
For these very same reason, zero with the joiner is also
dangerous.
It pretty much does the opposite.
Like, it forces ligatures or variance.
And the more common cases are certainly variance, which,
in this case, this is, again, arabic.
And this is like the character bar or whatever.
And the first one is like the form of it
if it's just standing there on its own.
But you might want a different form.
Like, you might want the form if it's
at the end of the word, where you just
would put zero with joiner before it,
like representing there's something, and then there's bar.
All right, the beginning of word, which means you put zero
with joiner at the end, or in the middle of the word,
where you put zero with joiner on both sides of it.
And it changes its shape based on what you do,
which is sort of like for someone used to do that enough
a bit of this seems quite nonsense.
But arabic language does a lot with ligatures
and a lot of having characters look differently
depending on where in the word they are.
So this probably makes sense to have.
And then there is half and full with characters.
And I'd actually rather start with the Y first year.
So in CJK computing, so Chinese, Japanese, Korean computing,
if you had terminals, traditionally, the CJK characters
would be twice as white as a normal ASCII characters,
just because you have things to draw, right,
and would not look good if they were that small.
And these double with characters sort of were called full with,
and everything that was as white as one of our characters,
let's say, was called half with.
So in order to be able to like print things nicely
and create tables nicely, Unicode
includes the whole ASCII standard invariant, which
is full with, so twice as white as it usually
would be there's an A, which is still an A, but twice as white.
And also there's some katakana and hanghur
in half with version, so which would normally take up
like two places, but it's made half as white in order
to be able to be printed together with other normal ASCII
characters.
And I guess the problem with them is sort of obviously
and confusion, right, because they are different code points
and they have a very different use,
like just mapping them, if you're typing them into a terminal,
it would be, well, it would mess up the presentation
of whatever you're typing, right?
But still, an A is an A, no matter if it's usual A
or a full with A. And that's actually all I have for now.
So thank you for your attention, and I would take questions.
Nothing.
OK.
Then, just thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
